A car (or automobile) is a wheeled motor vehicle used for transportation. Most definitions of car say they run primarily on roads, seat one to eight people, have four tires, and mainly transport people rather than goods.[2][3]

Cars came into global use during the 20th century, and developed economies depend on them. The year 1886 is regarded as the birth year of the modern car when German inventor Karl Benz patented his Benz Patent-Motorwagen. Cars became widely available in the early 20th century. One of the first cars accessible to the masses was the 1908 Model T, an American car manufactured by the Ford Motor Company. Cars were rapidly adopted in the US, where they replaced animal-drawn carriages and carts, but took much longer to be accepted in Western Europe and other parts of the world.[citation needed]

Cars have controls for driving, parking, passenger comfort, and a variety of lights. Over the decades, additional features and controls have been added to vehicles, making them progressively more complex, but also more reliable and easier to operate.[citation needed] These include rear reversing cameras, air conditioning, navigation systems, and in-car entertainment. Most cars in use in the 2010s are propelled by an internal combustion engine, fueled by the combustion of fossil fuels. Electric cars, which were invented early in the history of the car, became commercially available in the 2000s and are predicted to cost less to buy than gasoline cars before 2025.[4][5]

There are costs and benefits to car use. The costs to the individual include acquiring the vehicle, interest payments (if the car is financed), repairs and maintenance, fuel, depreciation, driving time, parking fees, taxes, and insurance.[6] The costs to society include maintaining roads, land use, road congestion, air pollution, public health, health care, and disposing of the vehicle at the end of its life. Traffic collisions are the largest cause of injury-related deaths worldwide.[7]

The personal benefits include on-demand transportation, mobility, independence, and convenience.[8] The societal benefits include economic benefits, such as job and wealth creation from the automotive industry, transportation provision, societal well-being from leisure and travel opportunities, and revenue generation from the taxes. People's ability to move flexibly from place to place has far-reaching implications for the nature of societies.[9] There are around 1 billion cars in use worldwide. The numbers are increasing rapidly, especially in China, India and other newly industrialized countries.[10]


Contents
1	Etymology
2	History
3	Mass production
4	Fuel and propulsion technologies
5	User interface
6	Lighting
7	Weight
8	Seating and body style
9	Safety
10	Costs and benefits
11	Environmental impact
12	Emerging car technologies
12.1	Autonomous car
12.2	Open source development
12.3	Car sharing
13	Industry
14	Alternatives
15	Other meanings
16	See also
17	References
18	Further reading
19	External links
Etymology
The word car is believed to originate from the Latin word carrus or carrum ("wheeled vehicle"), or the Middle English word carre (meaning "two-wheel cart", from Old North French). In turn, these originated from the Gaulish word karros (a Gallic chariot).[11][12] It originally referred to any wheeled horse-drawn vehicle, such as a cart, carriage, or wagon.[13][14] "Motor car" is attested from 1895, and is the usual formal name for cars in British English.[3] "Autocar" is a variant that is also attested from 1895, but that is now considered archaic. It literally means "self-propelled car".[15] The term "horseless carriage" was used by some to refer to the first cars at the time that they were being built, and is attested from 1895.[16]

The word "automobile" is a classical compound derived from the Ancient Greek word autós (αὐτός), meaning "self", and the Latin word mobilis, meaning "movable". It entered the English language from French, and was first adopted by the Automobile Club of Great Britain in 1897.[17] Over time, the word "automobile" fell out of favour in Britain, and was replaced by "motor car". "Automobile" remains chiefly North American, particularly as a formal or commercial term.[18] An abbreviated form, "auto", was formerly a common way to refer to cars in English, but is now considered old-fashioned. The word is still very common as an adjective in American English, usually in compound formations like "auto industry" and "auto mechanic".[19][20] In Dutch and German, two languages historically related to English, the abbreviated form "auto" (Dutch) / "Auto" (German), as well as the formal full version "automobiel" (Dutch) / "Automobil" (German) are still used — in either the short form is the most regular word for "car".

History
Main article: History of the automobile
The first working steam-powered vehicle was designed — and quite possibly built — by Ferdinand Verbiest, a Flemish member of a Jesuit mission in China around 1672. It was a 65-cm-long scale-model toy for the Chinese Emperor that was unable to carry a driver or a passenger.[8][21][22] It is not known with certainty if Verbiest's model was successfully built or run.[22]


Cugnot's 1771 fardier à vapeur, as preserved at the Musée des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France
Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot is widely credited with building the first full-scale, self-propelled mechanical vehicle or car in about 1769; he created a steam-powered tricycle.[23] He also constructed two steam tractors for the French Army, one of which is preserved in the French National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts.[24] His inventions were, however, handicapped by problems with water supply and maintaining steam pressure.[24] In 1801, Richard Trevithick built and demonstrated his Puffing Devil road locomotive, believed by many to be the first demonstration of a steam-powered road vehicle. It was unable to maintain sufficient steam pressure for long periods and was of little practical use.

The development of external combustion engines is detailed as part of the history of the car but often treated separately from the development of true cars. A variety of steam-powered road vehicles were used during the first part of the 19th century, including steam cars, steam buses, phaetons, and steam rollers. Sentiment against them led to the Locomotive Acts of 1865.

In 1807, Nicéphore Niépce and his brother Claude created what was probably the world's first internal combustion engine (which they called a Pyréolophore), but they chose to install it in a boat on the river Saone in France.[25] Coincidentally, in 1807 the Swiss inventor François Isaac de Rivaz designed his own 'de Rivaz internal combustion engine' and used it to develop the world's first vehicle to be powered by such an engine. The Niépces' Pyréolophore was fuelled by a mixture of Lycopodium powder (dried spores of the Lycopodium plant), finely crushed coal dust and resin that were mixed with oil, whereas de Rivaz used a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen.[25] Neither design was very successful, as was the case with others, such as Samuel Brown, Samuel Morey, and Etienne Lenoir with his hippomobile, who each produced vehicles (usually adapted carriages or carts) powered by internal combustion engines.[1]


Gustave Trouvé's tricycle, the first ever electric automobile to be shown in public

Karl Benz, the inventor of the modern car
In November 1881, French inventor Gustave Trouvé demonstrated the first working (three-wheeled) car powered by electricity at the International Exposition of Electricity, Paris.[26] Although several other German engineers (including Gottlieb Daimler, Wilhelm Maybach, and Siegfried Marcus) were working on the problem at about the same time, Karl Benz generally is acknowledged as the inventor of the modern car.[1]


The original Benz Patent-Motorwagen, first built in 1885 and awarded the patent for the concept
In 1879, Benz was granted a patent for his first engine, which had been designed in 1878. Many of his other inventions made the use of the internal combustion engine feasible for powering a vehicle. His first Motorwagen was built in 1885 in Mannheim, Germany. He was awarded the patent for its invention as of his application on 29 January 1886 (under the auspices of his major company, Benz & Cie., which was founded in 1883). Benz began promotion of the vehicle on 3 July 1886, and about 25 Benz vehicles were sold between 1888 and 1893, when his first four-wheeler was introduced along with a cheaper model. They also were powered with four-stroke engines of his own design. Emile Roger of France, already producing Benz engines under license, now added the Benz car to his line of products. Because France was more open to the early cars, initially more were built and sold in France through Roger than Benz sold in Germany. In August 1888 Bertha Benz, the wife of Karl Benz, undertook the first road trip by car, to prove the road-worthiness of her husband's invention.


Bertha Benz, the first long distance driver
In 1896, Benz designed and patented the first internal-combustion flat engine, called boxermotor. During the last years of the nineteenth century, Benz was the largest car company in the world with 572 units produced in 1899 and, because of its size, Benz & Cie., became a joint-stock company. The first motor car in central Europe and one of the first factory-made cars in the world, was produced by Czech company Nesselsdorfer Wagenbau (later renamed to Tatra) in 1897, the Präsident automobil.

Daimler and Maybach founded Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft (DMG) in Cannstatt in 1890, and sold their first car in 1892 under the brand name Daimler. It was a horse-drawn stagecoach built by another manufacturer, which they retrofitted with an engine of their design. By 1895 about 30 vehicles had been built by Daimler and Maybach, either at the Daimler works or in the Hotel Hermann, where they set up shop after disputes with their backers. Benz, Maybach and the Daimler team seem to have been unaware of each other's early work. They never worked together; by the time of the merger of the two companies, Daimler and Maybach were no longer part of DMG. Daimler died in 1900 and later that year, Maybach designed an engine named Daimler-Mercedes that was placed in a specially ordered model built to specifications set by Emil Jellinek. This was a production of a small number of vehicles for Jellinek to race and market in his country. Two years later, in 1902, a new model DMG car was produced and the model was named Mercedes after the Maybach engine, which generated 35 hp. Maybach quit DMG shortly thereafter and opened a business of his own. Rights to the Daimler brand name were sold to other manufacturers.

Karl Benz proposed co-operation between DMG and Benz & Cie. when economic conditions began to deteriorate in Germany following the First World War, but the directors of DMG refused to consider it initially. Negotiations between the two companies resumed several years later when these conditions worsened and, in 1924 they signed an Agreement of Mutual Interest, valid until the year 2000. Both enterprises standardized design, production, purchasing, and sales and they advertised or marketed their car models jointly, although keeping their respective brands. On 28 June 1926, Benz & Cie. and DMG finally merged as the Daimler-Benz company, baptizing all of its cars Mercedes Benz, as a brand honoring the most important model of the DMG cars, the Maybach design later referred to as the 1902 Mercedes-35 hp, along with the Benz name. Karl Benz remained a member of the board of directors of Daimler-Benz until his death in 1929, and at times, his two sons also participated in the management of the company.


Émile Levassor

Armand Peugeot
In 1890, Émile Levassor and Armand Peugeot of France began producing vehicles with Daimler engines, and so laid the foundation of the automotive industry in France. In 1891, Auguste Doriot and his Peugeot colleague Louis Rigoulot completed the longest trip by a gasoline-powered vehicle when their self-designed and built Daimler powered Peugeot Type 3 completed 2,100 km (1,300 miles) from Valentigney to Paris and Brest and back again. They were attached to the first Paris–Brest–Paris bicycle race, but finished 6 days after the winning cyclist, Charles Terront.

The first design for an American car with a gasoline internal combustion engine was made in 1877 by George Selden of Rochester, New York. Selden applied for a patent for a car in 1879, but the patent application expired because the vehicle was never built. After a delay of sixteen years and a series of attachments to his application, on 5 November 1895, Selden was granted a United States patent (U.S. Patent 549,160) for a two-stroke car engine, which hindered, more than encouraged, development of cars in the United States. His patent was challenged by Henry Ford and others, and overturned in 1911.

In 1893, the first running, gasoline-powered American car was built and road-tested by the Duryea brothers of Springfield, Massachusetts. The first public run of the Duryea Motor Wagon took place on 21 September 1893, on Taylor Street in Metro Center Springfield.[27][28] The Studebaker Automobile Company, subsidiary of a long-established wagon and coach manufacturer, started to build cars in 1897[29]:p.66 and commenced sales of electric vehicles in 1902 and gasoline vehicles in 1904.[30]

In Britain, there had been several attempts to build steam cars with varying degrees of success, with Thomas Rickett even attempting a production run in 1860.[31] Santler from Malvern is recognized by the Veteran Car Club of Great Britain as having made the first gasoline-powered car in the country in 1894,[32] followed by Frederick William Lanchester in 1895, but these were both one-offs.[32] The first production vehicles in Great Britain came from the Daimler Company, a company founded by Harry J. Lawson in 1896, after purchasing the right to use the name of the engines. Lawson's company made its first car in 1897, and they bore the name Daimler.[32]

In 1892, German engineer Rudolf Diesel was granted a patent for a "New Rational Combustion Engine". In 1897, he built the first diesel engine.[1] Steam-, electric-, and gasoline-powered vehicles competed for decades, with gasoline internal combustion engines achieving dominance in the 1910s. Although various pistonless rotary engine designs have attempted to compete with the conventional piston and crankshaft design, only Mazda's version of the Wankel engine has had more than very limited success.

All in all, it is estimated that over 100,000 patents created the modern automobile and motorcycle.[33]

Mass production
See also: Automotive industry

Ransom E. Olds founded Olds Motor Vehicle Company (Oldsmobile) in 1897

Henry Ford founded Ford Motor Company in 1903

1927 Ford Model T

Kiichiro Toyoda, president of the Toyota Motor Corporation 1941–1950

Mass production at a Toyota plant in the 1950s
Large-scale, production-line manufacturing of affordable cars was started by Ransom Olds in 1901 at his Oldsmobile factory in Lansing, Michigan and based upon stationary assembly line techniques pioneered by Marc Isambard Brunel at the Portsmouth Block Mills, England, in 1802. The assembly line style of mass production and interchangeable parts had been pioneered in the U.S. by Thomas Blanchard in 1821, at the Springfield Armory in Springfield, Massachusetts.[34] This concept was greatly expanded by Henry Ford, beginning in 1913 with the world's first moving assembly line for cars at the Highland Park Ford Plant.

As a result, Ford's cars came off the line in fifteen-minute intervals, much faster than previous methods, increasing productivity eightfold, while using less manpower (from 12.5-man-hours to 1 hour 33 minutes).[35] It was so successful, paint became a bottleneck. Only Japan black would dry fast enough, forcing the company to drop the variety of colors available before 1913, until fast-drying Duco lacquer was developed in 1926. This is the source of Ford's apocryphal remark, "any color as long as it's black".[35] In 1914, an assembly line worker could buy a Model T with four months' pay.[35]

Ford's complex safety procedures—especially assigning each worker to a specific location instead of allowing them to roam about—dramatically reduced the rate of injury.[citation needed] The combination of high wages and high efficiency is called "Fordism," and was copied by most major industries. The efficiency gains from the assembly line also coincided with the economic rise of the United States. The assembly line forced workers to work at a certain pace with very repetitive motions which led to more output per worker while other countries were using less productive methods.

In the automotive industry, its success was dominating, and quickly spread worldwide seeing the founding of Ford France and Ford Britain in 1911, Ford Denmark 1923, Ford Germany 1925; in 1921, Citroen was the first native European manufacturer to adopt the production method. Soon, companies had to have assembly lines, or risk going broke; by 1930, 250 companies which did not, had disappeared.[35]

Development of automotive technology was rapid, due in part to the hundreds of small manufacturers competing to gain the world's attention. Key developments included electric ignition and the electric self-starter (both by Charles Kettering, for the Cadillac Motor Company in 1910–1911), independent suspension, and four-wheel brakes.

Since the 1920s, nearly all cars have been mass-produced to meet market needs, so marketing plans often have heavily influenced car design. It was Alfred P. Sloan who established the idea of different makes of cars produced by one company, called the General Motors Companion Make Program, so that buyers could "move up" as their fortunes improved.

Reflecting the rapid pace of change, makes shared parts with one another so larger production volume resulted in lower costs for each price range. For example, in the 1930s, LaSalles, sold by Cadillac, used cheaper mechanical parts made by Oldsmobile; in the 1950s, Chevrolet shared hood, doors, roof, and windows with Pontiac; by the 1990s, corporate powertrains and shared platforms (with interchangeable brakes, suspension, and other parts) were common. Even so, only major makers could afford high costs, and even companies with decades of production, such as Apperson, Cole, Dorris, Haynes, or Premier, could not manage: of some two hundred American car makers in existence in 1920, only 43 survived in 1930, and with the Great Depression, by 1940, only 17 of those were left.[35]

In Europe, much the same would happen. Morris set up its production line at Cowley in 1924, and soon outsold Ford, while beginning in 1923 to follow Ford's practice of vertical integration, buying Hotchkiss (engines), Wrigley (gearboxes), and Osberton (radiators), for instance, as well as competitors, such as Wolseley: in 1925, Morris had 41% of total British car production. Most British small-car assemblers, from Abbey to Xtra, had gone under. Citroen did the same in France, coming to cars in 1919; between them and other cheap cars in reply such as Renault's 10CV and Peugeot's 5CV, they produced 550,000 cars in 1925, and Mors, Hurtu, and others could not compete.[35] Germany's first mass-manufactured car, the Opel 4PS Laubfrosch (Tree Frog), came off the line at Russelsheim in 1924, soon making Opel the top car builder in Germany, with 37.5% of the market.[35]

In Japan, car production was very limited before World War II. Only a handful of companies were producing vehicles in limited numbers, and these were small, three-wheeled for commercial uses, like Daihatsu, or were the result of partnering with European companies, like Isuzu building the Wolseley A-9 in 1922. Mitsubishi was also partnered with Fiat and built the Mitsubishi Model A based on a Fiat vehicle. Toyota, Nissan, Suzuki, Mazda, and Honda began as companies producing non-automotive products before the war, switching to car production during the 1950s. Kiichiro Toyoda's decision to take Toyoda Loom Works into automobile manufacturing would create what would eventually become Toyota Motor Corporation, the largest automobile manufacturer in the world. Subaru, meanwhile, was formed from a conglomerate of six companies who banded together as Fuji Heavy Industries, as a result of having been broken up under keiretsu legislation.

Fuel and propulsion technologies

The Nissan Leaf is an all-electric car launched in December 2010
See also: Alternative fuel vehicle
According to the European Environment Agency, the transport sector is a major contributor to air pollution, noise pollution and climate change.[36]

Most cars in use in the 2010s run on gasoline burnt in an internal combustion engine (ICE). The International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers says that, in countries that mandate low sulfur gasoline, gasoline-fuelled cars built to late 2010s standards (such as Euro-6) emit very little local air pollution.[37][38] Some cities ban older gasoline-fuelled cars and some countries plan to ban sales in future. However some environmental groups say this phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles must be brought forward to limit climate change. Production of gasoline fueled cars peaked in 2017.[39][40]

Other hydrocarbon fossil fuels also burnt by deflagration (rather than detonation) in ICE cars include diesel, Autogas and CNG. Removal of fossil fuel subsidies,[41][42] concerns about oil dependence, tightening environmental laws and restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions are propelling work on alternative power systems for cars. This includes hybrid vehicles, plug-in electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles. 2.1 million light electric vehicles (of all types but mainly cars) were sold in 2018, over half in China: this was an increase of 64% on the previous year, giving a global total on the road of 5.4 million.[43] Vehicles using alternative fuels such as ethanol flexible-fuel vehicles and natural gas vehicles[clarification needed] are also gaining popularity in some countries.[citation needed] Cars for racing or speed records have sometimes employed jet or rocket engines, but these are impractical for common use.

Oil consumption has increased rapidly in the 20th and 21st centuries because there are more cars; the 1985–2003 oil glut even fuelled the sales of low-economy vehicles in OECD countries. The BRIC countries are adding to this consumption.

User interface
See also: Car controls

In the Ford Model T the left-side hand lever sets the rear wheel parking brakes and puts the transmission in neutral. The lever to the right controls the throttle. The lever on the left of the steering column is for ignition timing. The left foot pedal changes the two forward gears while the centre pedal controls reverse. The right pedal is the brake.
Cars are equipped with controls used for driving, passenger comfort and safety, normally operated by a combination of the use of feet and hands, and occasionally by voice on 21st century cars. These controls include a steering wheel, pedals for operating the brakes and controlling the car's speed (and, in a manual transmission car, a clutch pedal), a shift lever or stick for changing gears, and a number of buttons and dials for turning on lights, ventilation and other functions. Modern cars' controls are now standardised, such as the location for the accelerator and brake, but this was not always the case. Controls are evolving in response to new technologies, for example the electric car and the integration of mobile communications.

Some of the original controls are no longer required. For example, all cars once had controls for the choke valve, clutch, ignition timing, and a crank instead of an electric starter. However new controls have also been added to vehicles, making them more complex. These include air conditioning, navigation systems, and in car entertainment. Another trend is the replacement of physical knobs and switches by secondary controls with touchscreen controls such as BMW's iDrive and Ford's MyFord Touch. Another change is that while early cars' pedals were physically linked to the brake mechanism and throttle, in the 2010s, cars have increasingly replaced these physical linkages with electronic controls.

Lighting
Main article: Automotive lighting

LED daytime running lights on an Audi A4
Cars are typically fitted with multiple types of lights. These include headlights, which are used to illuminate the way ahead and make the car visible to other users, so that the vehicle can be used at night; in some jurisdictions, daytime running lights; red brake lights to indicate when the brakes are applied; amber turn signal lights to indicate the turn intentions of the driver; white-colored reverse lights to illuminate the area behind the car (and indicate that the driver will be or is reversing); and on some vehicles, additional lights (e.g., side marker lights) to increase the visibility of the car. Interior lights on the ceiling of the car are usually fitted for the driver and passengers. Some vehicles also have a trunk light and, more rarely, an engine compartment light.

Weight

The Smart Fortwo car from 1998-2002, weighing 730 kg (1,610 lb)

A Chevrolet Suburban extended-length SUV weighs 3,300 kg (7,200 lb) (gross weight)[44]
In the United States, "from 1975 to 1980, average [car] weight dropped from 1,842 to 1,464 kg (4,060 to 3,228 lb), likely in response to rising gasoline prices" and new fuel efficiency standards.[45] The average new car weighed 1,461 kg (3,221 lb) in 1987 but 1,818 kg (4,009 lb) in 2010, due to modern steel safety cages, anti-lock brakes, airbags, and "more-powerful—if more-efficient—engines."[46] Heavier cars are safer for the driver from a crash perspective, but more dangerous for other vehicles and road users.[46] The weight of a car influences fuel consumption and performance, with more weight resulting in increased fuel consumption and decreased performance. The SmartFortwo, a small city car, weighs 750–795 kg (1,655–1,755 lb). Heavier cars include full-size cars, SUVs and extended-length SUVs like the Suburban.

According to research conducted by Julian Allwood of the University of Cambridge, global energy use could be greatly reduced by using lighter cars, and an average weight of 500 kg (1,100 lb) has been said to be well achievable.[47][better source needed] In some competitions such as the Shell Eco Marathon, average car weights of 45 kg (99 lb) have also been achieved.[48] These cars are only single-seaters (still falling within the definition of a car, although 4-seater cars are more common), but they nevertheless demonstrate the amount by which car weights could still be reduced, and the subsequent lower fuel use (i.e. up to a fuel use of 2560 km/l).[49]

Seating and body style
See also: Car body style, Car classification, Truck classification, and Vehicle size class
Most cars are designed to carry multiple occupants, often with four or five seats. Cars with five seats typically seat two passengers in the front and three in the rear. Full-size cars and large sport utility vehicles can often carry six, seven, or more occupants depending on the arrangement of the seats. On the other hand, sports cars are most often designed with only two seats. The differing needs for passenger capacity and their luggage or cargo space has resulted in the availability of a large variety of body styles to meet individual consumer requirements that include, among others, the sedan/saloon, hatchback, station wagon/estate, and minivan.

Safety
Main articles: Car safety, Traffic collision, Low speed vehicle, and Epidemiology of motor vehicle collisions

Result of a serious car collision
Traffic collisions are the largest cause of injury-related deaths worldwide.[7] Mary Ward became one of the first documented car fatalities in 1869 in Parsonstown, Ireland,[50] and Henry Bliss one of the United States' first pedestrian car casualties in 1899 in New York City.[51] There are now standard tests for safety in new cars, such as the EuroNCAP and the US NCAP tests,[52] and insurance-industry-backed tests by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS).[53]

Costs and benefits
Main articles: Economics of car usage, Car costs, and Effects of the car on societies

Road congestion is an issue in many major cities. (pictured is Chang'an Avenue in Beijing)[54]
The costs of car usage, which may include the cost of: acquiring the vehicle, repairs and auto maintenance, fuel, depreciation, driving time, parking fees, taxes, and insurance,[6] are weighed against the cost of the alternatives, and the value of the benefits – perceived and real – of vehicle usage. The benefits may include on-demand transportation, mobility, independence and convenience.[8] During the 1920s, cars had another benefit: "[c]ouples finally had a way to head off on unchaperoned dates, plus they had a private space to snuggle up close at the end of the night."[55]

Similarly the costs to society of car use may include; maintaining roads, land use, air pollution, road congestion, public health, health care, and of disposing of the vehicle at the end of its life; and can be balanced against the value of the benefits to society that car use generates. Societal benefits may include: economy benefits, such as job and wealth creation, of car production and maintenance, transportation provision, society wellbeing derived from leisure and travel opportunities, and revenue generation from the tax opportunities. The ability of humans to move flexibly from place to place has far-reaching implications for the nature of societies.[9]

Environmental impact
See also: Exhaust gas, Waste tires, Environmental impact of transport, Motor vehicle emissions and pregnancy, Noise pollution, Environmental aspects of the electric car, Vehicle recycling, and Externalities of automobiles

Vehicles in use per country from 2001 to 2007. It shows the significant growth in BRIC.
While there are different types of fuel that may power cars most rely on gasoline or diesel, and they consume almost a quarter of world oil production as of 2019.[39] The United States Environmental Protection Agency states that the average vehicle emits 8,887 grams of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO
2) per gallon of gasoline.[citation needed] The average vehicle running on diesel fuel will emit 10,180 grams of carbon dioxide.[56] Many governments are using fiscal policies (such as road tax or the US gas guzzler tax) to influence vehicle purchase decisions, with a low CO
2 figure often resulting in reduced taxation.[57] Fuel taxes may act as an incentive for the production of more efficient, hence less polluting, car designs (e.g. hybrid vehicles) and the development of alternative fuels. High fuel taxes may provide a strong incentive for consumers to purchase lighter, smaller, more fuel-efficient cars, or to not drive. On average, today's[when?] cars are about 75 percent recyclable, and using recycled steel helps reduce energy use and pollution.[58] According to the International Energy Agency fuel economy improved 0.7% in 2017, but an annual improvement of 3.7% is needed to meet the Global Fuel Economy Initiative 2030 target.[59] The increase in sales of SUVs is bad for fuel economy.[39] Many cities in Europe, have banned older fossil fuel cars and all fossil fuel vehicles will be banned in Amsterdam from 2030.[60] Many Chinese cities limit licensing of fossil fuel cars,[61] and many countries plan to stop selling them between 2025 and 2050.[62]

The manufacture of vehicles is resource intensive, and many manufacturers now report on the environmental performance of their factories, including energy usage, waste and water consumption.[63] Manufacturing each kWh of battery emits a similar amount of carbon as burning through one full tank of gasoline.[64]

The growth in popularity of the car allowed cities to sprawl, therefore encouraging more travel by car resulting in inactivity and obesity, which in turn can lead to increased risk of a variety of diseases.[65]

Transportation (of all types including trucks, buses and cars) is a major contributor to air pollution in most industrialised nations. According to the American Surface Transportation Policy Project nearly half of all Americans are breathing unhealthy air. Their study showed air quality in dozens of metropolitan areas has worsened over the last decade.[66]

Animals and plants are often negatively impacted by cars via habitat destruction and pollution. Over the lifetime of the average car the "loss of habitat potential" may be over 50,000 m2 (540,000 sq ft) based on primary production correlations.[67] Animals are also killed every year on roads by cars, referred to as roadkill. More recent road developments are including significant environmental mitigations in their designs such as green bridges to allow wildlife crossings, and creating wildlife corridors.

Growth in the popularity of vehicles and commuting has led to traffic congestion. Moscow, Istanbul, Bogota, Mexico City and Sao Paulo were the world's most congested cities in 2018 according to INRIX, a data analytics company.[68]

Emerging car technologies
Although intensive development of conventional battery electric vehicles is continuing into the 2020s,[69] other car propulsion technologies that are under development include wheel hub motors,[70] hydrogen cars,[71] and hydrogen/electric hybrids.[72] Research into alternative forms of power includes using ammonia instead of hydrogen in fuel cells.[73]

New materials[74] which may replace steel car bodies include duralumin, fiberglass, carbon fiber, biocomposites, and carbon nanotubes. Telematics technology is allowing more and more people to share cars, on a pay-as-you-go basis, through car share and carpool schemes. Communication is also evolving due to connected car systems.[75]

Autonomous car
Main article: Autonomous car

A robotic Volkswagen Passat shown at Stanford University is a driverless car
Fully autonomous vehicles, also known as driverless cars, already exist in prototype (such as the Google driverless car), but have a long way to go before they are in general use. According to urban designer and futurist Michael E. Arth, driverless electric vehicles—in conjunction with the increased use of virtual reality for work, travel, and pleasure—could reduce the world's 800 million vehicles to a fraction[vague] of that number within a few decades.[76] This would be possible if almost all private cars requiring drivers, which are not in use and parked 90% of the time, were replaced by public self-driving taxis that would be in nearly constant use.[This would require travel to work to be spread evenly throughout the 24 hour day.] This would require an appropriate vehicle to be available for each particular need—a bus could come for a group of people, a limousine could come for a special night out, and a Segway could come for a short trip down the street for one person. Children could be chauffeured in supervised safety, DUIs would no longer exist, and 41,000 lives could be saved each year in the US alone.[77][78]

Open source development
Main article: Open source car
There have been several projects aiming to develop a car on the principles of open design, an approach to designing in which the plans for the machinery and systems are publicly shared, often without monetary compensation. The projects include OScar, Riversimple (through 40fires.org)[79] and c,mm,n.[80] None of the projects have reached significant success in terms of developing a car as a whole both from hardware and software perspective and no mass production ready open-source based design have been introduced as of late 2009. Some car hacking through on-board diagnostics (OBD) has been done so far.[81]

Car sharing
Car-share arrangements and carpooling are also increasingly popular, in the US and Europe.[82] For example, in the US, some car-sharing services have experienced double-digit growth in revenue and membership growth between 2006 and 2007. Services like car sharing offering a residents to "share" a vehicle rather than own a car in already congested neighborhoods.[83]

Industry
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (March 2019)
Main article: Automotive industry

A car being assembled in a factory
The automotive industry designs, develops, manufactures, markets, and sells the world's motor vehicles, more than three-quarters of which are cars. In 2018 there were 70 million cars manufactured worldwide,[84] down 2 million from the previous year.[85]

The automotive industry in China produces by far the most (24 million in 2018), followed by Japan (8 million), Germany (5 million) and India (4 million).[84] The largest market is China, followed by the USA.

Around the world there are about a billion cars on the road;[86] they burn over a trillion liters of gasoline and diesel fuel yearly, consuming about 50 EJ (nearly 300,000,000,000 kilowatt-hours) of energy.[87] The numbers of cars are increasing rapidly in China and India.[10] In the opinion of some, urban transport systems based around the car have proved unsustainable, consuming excessive energy, affecting the health of populations, and delivering a declining level of service despite increasing investment. Many of these negative impacts fall disproportionately on those social groups who are also least likely to own and drive cars.[88][89][90] The sustainable transport movement focuses on solutions to these problems. The car industry is also facing increasing competition from the public transport sector, as some people re-evaluate their private vehicle usage.

Alternatives
Main article: Alternatives to car use

The Vélib' in Paris, France is the largest bikesharing system outside China[91]
Established alternatives for some aspects of car use include public transport such as buses, trolleybuses, trains, subways, tramways, light rail, cycling, and walking. Bicycle sharing systems have been established in China and many European cities, including Copenhagen and Amsterdam. Similar programs have been developed in large US cities.[92][93] Additional individual modes of transport, such as personal rapid transit could serve as an alternative to cars if they prove to be socially accepted.[94]

Other meanings
The term motorcar has formerly also been used in the context of electrified rail systems to denote a car which functions as a small locomotive but also provides space for passengers and baggage. These locomotive cars were often used on suburban routes by both interurban and intercity railroad systems


Location
Radius
ZIP code
78414
Delivery to Your Door
Include vehicles that can be delivered to you
Price
Min Price
$1,000
Max Price
$106,285
What can I afford?
Condition
Year
Minimum Year
Maximum Year
Mileage
Make
Buick (289)
Chevrolet (1,958)
Dodge (340)
Ford (2,461)
GMC (490)
Honda (461)
Hyundai (315)
Jeep (526)
RAM (744)
Toyota (1,145)
See More
Body Style
Convertible (107)
Coupe (328)
Hatchback (236)
Sedan (1,511)
SUV / Crossover (3,677)
Truck (3,716)
Van / Minivan (213)
Wagon (12)
Drive Type
AWD/4WD (2,857)
Front Wheel Drive (4,056)
Rear Wheel Drive (2,873)
Fuel Type
Diesel (731)
Electric (19)
Gasoline (8,965)
Hybrid (75)
Plug-in Hybrid (6)
See More
Fuel Economy
10 - 19 MPG (395)
20 - 29 MPG (5,439)
30 - 39 MPG (2,350)
40+ MPG (346)
Transmission
Automatic (9,623)
Manual (98)
Cylinders
3 Cylinder (81)
4 Cylinder (3,666)
5 Cylinder (5)
6 Cylinder (3,197)
8 Cylinder (2,778)
10 Cylinder (2)
See More
Exterior Color
Black (1,862)
Blue (754)
Brown (138)
Gold (47)
Gray (1,398)
Green (91)
Off White (130)
Red (1,006)
Silver (1,448)
White (2,348)
See More
Interior Color
Beige (472)
Black (5,363)
Blue (7)
Brown (174)
Burgundy (5)
Gray (1,532)
Off White (42)
Red (23)
Tan (165)
White (11)
Features
Exterior Features
Keyless Entry (8,296)
Premium Wheels (7,316)
Roof Rack (2,175)
Trailer Hitch (3,344)
Disability Equipped (4)
Technology Features
Android Auto (3,704)
Apple CarPlay (4,009)
Bluetooth, Hands-Free (7,732)
Cruise Control (8,159)
DVD Player (317)
Navigation (3,135)
Portable Audio Connection (7,229)
Premium Audio (3,001)
Satellite Radio (6,774)
Steering Wheel Controls (7,524)
Interior Features
3rd Row Seats (1,427)
Heated Seats (3,682)
Leather Seats (2,273)
Sunroof (1,809)
Safety Features
Backup Camera (7,819)
Security System (7,664)
Doors
Two Door (539)
Three Door (33)
Four Door (9,179)
Five Door (5)
Price Rating
Good Price (1,043)
Great Price (795)
 More info
Seller Type
Dealer (9,746)
Private Seller (44)

Price
Condition
Year
Mileage
Make
Body Style
Drive Type
Fuel Type
Diesel (731)
Electric (19)
Gasoline (8,965)
Hybrid (75)
Plug-in Hybrid (6)
See More
Fuel Economy
Transmission
Automatic (9,623)
Manual (98)
Cylinders
Exterior Color
Interior Color
Features
Exterior Features
Keyless Entry (8,296)
Premium Wheels (7,316)
Roof Rack (2,175)
Trailer Hitch (3,344)
Other Features
Disability Equipped (4)
Technology Features
Android Auto (3,704)
Apple CarPlay (4,009)
Bluetooth, Hands-Free (7,732)
Cruise Control (8,159)
DVD Player (317)
Navigation (3,135)
Portable Audio Connection (7,229)
Premium Audio (3,001)
Satellite Radio (6,774)
Steering Wheel Controls (7,524)
Interior Features
3rd Row Seats (1,427)
Heated Seats (3,682)
Leather Seats (2,273)
Sunroof (1,809)
Safety Features
Backup Camera (7,819)
Security System (7,664)
Doors
Price Rating
Good Price (1,043)
Great Price (795)
 More info
Seller Type
Dealer (9,746)
Private Seller (44)
Adaptive Cruise Control (228)
Alloy Wheels (2060)
Apple CarPlay/Android Auto (303)
Automatic Emergency Braking (120)
Backup Camera (1898)
Blind Spot Monitor (465)
Bluetooth (2277)
Brake Assist (2055)
Cooled Seats (31)
Heated Seats (1072)
Heated Steering Wheel (322)
HomeLink (632)
Keyless Start (824)
LED Headlights (40)
Lane Departure Warning (291)
Leather Seats (1183)
Memory Seat (677)
Navigation System (975)
Premium Sound System (832)
Rear Cross Traffic Alert (316)
Rear Seat Entertainment (52)
Remote Start (932)
Stability Control (2285)
Sunroof/Moonroof (696)
Third Row Seating (413)
Tow Hitch (442)
USB Port (912)
Diesel (91)
E85 Flex Fuel (228)
Electric (8)
Gasoline (2371)
Hybrid (56)
Glossary of
Connected and Automated Vehicle Terms
VERSION 1.0
March 2018
Prepared by
University of Virginia Center for Transportation Studies
Hyungjun Park, Zulqarnain Khattak, and Brian Smith
for the
Connected Vehicle Pooled Fund Study 
1
Glossary of Connected and Automated Vehicle Terms
Version 1.0
March 2018
Absolute Positioning
Locating the position of a vehicle, to a very high degree of accuracy, with respect to an ideal
surface of the Earth (1).
Ad Hoc Clustering
Clustering process during which vehicles arrive in random sequence and not deliberately seek
out other similarly equipped vehicles. During this case, the probability of driving behind another
suitably equipped vehicle is directly related to the market penetration of equipped vehicles (2).
Also see “ITS Ad Hoc Domain”. Most of the existing Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control
(CACC) applications rely on ad-hoc clustering of vehicles.
Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS)
Additional electronic systems in motor vehicles supporting the driver in certain driving
situations. They often focus on safety aspects or on increased driving convenience. ADAS safety
features are designed to avoid collisions and crashes by offering technologies that alert the driver
to potential problems, or for example, automate the vehicle lighting to come on at dusk or sudden
darkness, provide adaptive cruise control, give automated braking, assist a vehicle to stay in its
lane, give automated traffic warnings via GPS, allow hands free voice activated smartphone
connection, alert drivers to other cars or dangers, etc. There are many forms of ADAS available
that function from data supplied by modules such as cameras, Light Detection and Ranging
(LIDAR), radar, sensors, computers, and in-car networking. Emerging ADAS systems will also
take advantage of externally supplied data through V2V and V2X systems through real time
interface with other vehicles and surrounding infrastructure (1).
Advanced Collision Avoidance Technologies (ACAT)
A National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) program that is defining
methodologies to measure the link between technological performance and safety impact of
crash avoidance systems (4).
Aftermarket
Equipment that is installed or brought in after purchase of the vehicle. Aftermarket modifications
do not involve the original equipment manufacturer (OEM), as contrasted with retrofits which
are done with the involvement of OEM (1).
Aftermarket Safety Device (ASD)
A connected device, not integrated during vehicle manufacture but added after sale. It is installed
in a vehicle and is capable of sending and receiving messages over a Dedicated Short-Range
Communication (DSRC) wireless communications link. The device has a driver interface, runs
V2V and V2I safety applications, and issues audible or visual warnings and/or alerts to the driver
of the vehicle (5). 
2
Antilock Braking System (ABS)
A system that prevents wheel lock-up by automatically regulating the brakes. ABS can decrease
braking distances on slippery pavement, prevent skidding, and provide greater control during
sudden stops (6).
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC)
An integrated circuit that is customized for a specific use; for example, an AISC designed to
accelerate computer vision (7).
ASIC can be found in almost any electronic device and its uses can range from custom rendering
of images to sound conversion (37).
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Intelligence that is learned, displayed, and carried out by machines. An "intelligent" machine
perceives its environment and then takes actions that maximize its chance of success at some
goal. Examples that we know include human speech recognition, which turns spoken words into
the contents of a text document or email, and autonomous driving, where the vehicle has a
learning element to recognize its environment including other vehicles, pedestrians and the
infrastructure (3).
Intelligence and decision-making that come from a machine and an autonomous vehicle is
known as artificial intelligence. Deep learning and machine learning are mainly included in AI
(7).
Automated Driving System (ADS)
A complex combination of various components that can be defined as systems where perception,
decision making, and operation of the automobile are performed by electronics and machinery
instead of a human driver, and as introduction of automation into road traffic (43). Automated
Driving Systems may include systems for which there is no human driver or for which the
human driver can give control to the automated driving systems and would not be expected to
perform any driving-related tasks for a period of time (42).
Automated Emergency Braking (AEB)
A system that detects an impending forward crash with another vehicle in time to avoid or
mitigate the crash. These systems first alert the driver to take corrective action to avoid the crash.
If the driver’s response is not sufficient to avoid the crash, the AEB system may automatically
apply the brakes to assist in preventing or reducing the severity of a crash. The NHTSA (8)
believes these technologies represent the next wave of potential significant advances in vehicle
safety. AEB systems, such as dynamic brake support (DBS) and crash imminent braking (CIB),
have the potential not only to save lives but to also reduce moderate and less severe rear-end
crashes that are common on our roadways (9).
Automated Highway System (AHS)
An automated highway or Smart Road, is an intelligent transportation system facility- designed
primarily for driverless or autonomous vehicles on specific, pre-determined routes. It is mainly 
3
devised as a means of relieving traffic congestion. These systems greatly reduce distances
normally required between the vehicle in front, therefore enabling the road to carry more
cars. AHSs are usually combined with ADAS technologies, such as adaptive cruise control and
collision avoidance systems (3).
Automated Vehicle
See “Terminologies for a Vehicle with Automation Capability” and “Levels of Driving
Automation”.
Automotive Data Center
A center designed specifically to handle the workloads associated with the development of
autonomous vehicles, including deep learning training and cloud services (7). The development
of autonomous vehicles starts in the automotive data center.
AutoNOMOS – Autonomous Vehicle Software
A modular software system for the operation of autonomous or semi-autonomous cars. Using
AutoNOMOS, it will be possible to detect impending dangers on roads, highways, and crossings
(lane changes, traffic jams, rights of way) at an early stage crashes in order to prevent crashes.
Once the technology is ready, it will be introduced first on private property (test sites) and later
in public traffic (3).
Autonomous Vehicle
See “Terminologies for a Vehicle with Automation Capability” and “Levels of Driving
Automation”.
Basic Safety Messages (BSM)
Data broadcasted from vehicles through V2V and V2I at a frequency of 10 Hz. The core contents
of a BSM are data elements that describe a vehicle’s position (latitude, longitude, and elevation)
and motion (heading, speed, and acceleration) (10).
Big Data
The information assets characterized by such a High Volume, Velocity and Variety to require
specific Technology and Analytical Methods for its transformation into Value (40).
Blind Spot Monitoring
One of the ADAS applications that monitors the driver’s blind spots at the rear quarters of the
car and provides visual, audible and/or tactile alerts when a vehicle is present in a situation
requiring such alerts (6).
Brake Assist
One of the ADAS applications that automatically applies full braking power when it detects that
the driver is executing a panic stop (6). Brake Assist helps in detection of attempted panic
braking based on the force that is applied to the brake pedal and how fast the driver is stepping
on the pedal. 
4
Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association (CTIA)
An industry trade group that represents the international wireless telecommunications industry.
Its members include cellular, personal communication services and enhanced specialized mobile
radio providers and suppliers, and providers and manufacturers of wireless data services and
products (4). Please refer to Table 1 Various Related Associations in the appendix for more
related associations.
Central Processing Unit (CPU)
The electronic circuitry in a vehicle’s (CAVs) computing system that performs programming
instructions; for example, Intel Atom® and Intel® Xeon® processors. See also “In-Vehicle
Compute”; “Intel Atom® Automotive Processors”; and “Intel® Xeon® Processors” (7).
Certificate
A set of data that uniquely identifies an entity, contains the entity’s public key and possibly other
information, and is digitally signed by a trusted party, thereby binding the public key to the entity
(1).
Certification
The process of assuring that a system component or interface meets an established standard (1).
Cloud Computing
A cloud refers to accessing computers, information technology (IT), and software applications
through a network connection, often by accessing data centers using wide area networking
(WAN) or Internet connectivity (49). Cloud computing replaces local data storage with storage
in a “cloud” that can be accessed via the Internet (11). This generally involves the delivery of
hosted computing services over the Internet rather than on an individual computer or at an
individual organization’s location. A variety of computing services may be included “in the
cloud,” from network servers to software applications (12).
Collision Avoidance Metrics Partnership (CAMP)
A partnership formed by vehicle OEMs to accelerate the implementation of crash avoidance
countermeasures in passenger vehicles to improve traffic safety (51). CAMP partnership is
engaged in cooperative research with National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
to advance safety research objectives of the Department’s Intelligent Vehicle Initiative.
Computer Vision
Machine-assisted moderation of images and the ability to extract rich information from images to
categorize and process visual data (13). Such systems, also known as machine vision, are
responsible for the autonomous vehicle’s ability to “see” its environment. Examples include the
technologies developed by Mobileye and Itseez (7).
Connected Vehicle (CV)
A vehicle (car, truck, bus, etc.) that is equipped with a wireless communication device (1). A CV
uses any of the available wireless communication technologies to communicate with other cars
on the road (vehicle-to-vehicle [V2V]), roadside infrastructure (vehicle-to-infrastructure [V2I]),
and other travelers and the cloud (14) (15). 
5
A research program – sponsored by the USDOT Research and Innovative Technology
Administration (RITA) and others – focusing on the development and deployment of a fully
connected transportation system that makes the most of multi-modal, transformational
applications addressing safety, mobility, and the environment (52).
Connected Vehicle Applications
Applications that are built to take advantage of a connected vehicle environment. As of
September 2017, the latest list of connected vehicle applications was prepared and provided at
the Architecture Reference for Cooperative and Intelligent Transportation (ARC-IT) website
(34). Descriptions of individual connected vehicle applications are not included in this glossary,
however the twelve application groups in which these applications are categorized are provided
in Table 1.
Table 2 Group of Connected Vehicle Applications from ARC-IT
Application Group Details
Commercial Vehicle
Operations
Includes applications and service packages that are relevant to the
operation, safety and management of commercial vehicles.
Data Management Includes service packages from various data sources including CVs to
support performance monitoring and other uses of historical data.
Maintenance and
Construction
Includes service packages that track maintenance and construction
vehicles and supports dissemination of these activities.
Parking Management Includes service packages that monitors and manages parking spaces
and provides real time information on park and ride services to
support travelers’ decision making.
Public Safety Includes service packages to support basic public safety, call-taking
and dispatch services and provides information to support dynamic
routing of emergency vehicles.
Public Transportation Includes service packages to monitor automated transit vehicle
location, perform automated dispatch of transit services and allows
travelers to request trips and request itineraries.
Support Includes service packages to provide monitoring, management and
control services to other applications and devices operating within CV
environment.
Sustainable Travel Includes service packages to monitor individual vehicle emissions and
support environmentally efficient operation of traffic signals and
lanes.
Traffic Management Includes service packages to support infrastructure and vehicle based
Surveillance and the use of CV information to improve the operation
of traffic systems.
Traveler Information Includes service packages to disseminate traveler information for
route planning and guidance.
Vehicle Safety Includes service packages that leverages sensors and safety messages
transmitted between CVs to support and augment vehicle safety
Weather Includes service packages for collecting road weather data and detect
environmental hazards to alert drivers. 
6
Some of the representative CV applications along with a short description are provided below:
 Advanced Automated Crash Notification Relay (AACN–RELAY): An application
that is anticipated to help transmit a range of data via other vehicles and roadside hot
spots that can help to enhance incident response (2).
 Emergency Vehicle Preemption (EVP): An application providing emergency vehicles
with an expedited green indication to allow faster passage through a signalized
intersection (4).
 Emergency Evacuation and Communication (EVAC): An application providing
dynamic route guidance information, current traffic and road conditions, location of
available lodging, and location of fuel, food, water, cash machines, and other necessities
(1).
 Incident Scene Work Zone Alerts for Drivers and Workers (INC-ZONE): An
application with two components: one warns drivers that are approaching temporary
work zones at unsafe speeds or trajectories; the other audibly warns public safety
personnel and other officials working in such zones about potential vehicle incursions
(4).
 Integrated Dynamic Transit Operations (IDTO): The bundle of applications that
transform transit mobility, operations, and services through the availability of new data
sources and communications. IDTO consist of three applications, T-CONNECT, T-DISP
and D-RIDE (4).
 Intelligent Traffic Signal System (ISIG): A traffic signal system that uses data
collected from vehicles through V2V and V2I communications as well as pedestrian and
non-motorized travelers to control signals and maximize flows in real time. The ISIG
application also plays the role of an overarching system optimization application,
accommodating transit or freight signal priority, preemption, and pedestrian movements
to maximize overall network performance (4).
 Mobile Accessible Pedestrian Signal System (PED-SIG): A signal system that
integrates information from roadside or intersection sensors and new forms of data from
pedestrian-carried mobile devices (4).
 Multimodal Intelligent Traffic Signal System (MMITSS): A V2I connected vehicle
application bundle that is the next generation of traffic signal systems. MMITSS provides
a comprehensive framework to serve all modes of transportation, including general
vehicles, transit, emergency vehicles, freight fleets, pedestrians, and bicyclists (4).
Connected Vehicle Reference Implementation Architecture (CVRIA)
A research effort by the ITS Joint Program Office (JPO) that aims to identify key interfaces of
the Connected Vehicle environment and to develop a plan for Connected Vehicle Standards (5).
The CVRIA has now been incorporated into the national ITS architecture (ARC-IT) and will no
longer be a separate architecture.
Connected Vehicle Trade Association (CVTA)
A non-profit business association established to facilitate the interaction and advance the
interests of the entities involved in the vehicle communication environment. The association
enables the collaboration of companies, organizations, and governmental bodies engaged in
developing bidirectional vehicle communications. Membership is open to any corporation, public 
7
entity, standards and specification organization, educational institution, or qualified individual
(5).
Constant Distance Gap (CDG)
CDG employs a constant separation between vehicles even when the speed of vehicles changes
during platooning. With such a tight control, the vehicle occupants experience the perception of a
mechanical linkage between vehicles. This type of control can only be achieved stably when the
communication received by each vehicle includes the information of the platoon leader or first
vehicle in the sequence (2).
Constant Time Gap (CTG)
With CTG, the distance between the vehicles is proportional to their speed (plus a small fixed
offset distance). A doubling of speed leads to an approximate doubling of clearance gap between
the vehicles. This (CTG) most closely represents the way human drivers normally drive at
highway speeds, therefore, commercially available adaptive cruise control systems use CTG (2).
Cooperative Systems
A term specified for systems that can bring new intelligence for vehicles, roadside systems,
operators and individuals, by creating a universally understood communications “language,”
allowing vehicles and infrastructure to share information and cooperate in an unlimited range of
new applications and services (1).
Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM)
A core message of the communications network, regularly providing key information to and
from ITS stations (1). The standard CAM is one of the components of the reference architecture
defined by the European Telecommunication Standards Institute (ETSI) for transmitting
geographically aware information with relevant data for other vehicles (17). CAM messages are
periodically sent and contain basic safety relevant status information like node actual position,
speed, acceleration or heading as well as the node identifier (18).
CV Penetration
A term representing the proportion of the vehicle fleet that are equipped with CV technology (4)
(5). The ability to use CV data depends on the penetration rate of equipped vehicles and the
underlying traffic conditions. Hence, there is a limit of a minimum penetration rate for accurate
estimation of various measures of effectiveness (MOEs) (19).
Cybersecurity
A broad term referring to the processes and practices designed to protect networks, computers,
programs and data from attack, damage or unauthorized access (50). In today’s connected world,
cybersecurity is an emerging threat in every field that relies upon communications. Therefore,
transportation operation and management systems utilizing wired and wireless communications
for managing roadways are also at significant risk of such cyberattacks.
Data Authentication
A process used to verify data integrity, e.g., verification that data received are identical to data
sent, or verification that a program is not infected by a virus (1). 
8
Decentralized Environmental Notification Message (DENM)
A message, defined in the EU standard, providing information about a location based situation
detected by vehicles or roadside units and distributed by store and forward mechanisms within
the ITS Ad Hoc Domain without a central control unit (1).
Decision-Making (decide)
The third and final of the three stages of in-vehicle computing required for autonomous driving
(sense, fuse, decide). In this stage, the vehicle must decide how to proceed based on the model it
has created of its environment. See also “Perception” and “Sensor Fusion” (7).
Dedicated Short Range Communication (DSRC)
A communications protocol developed to address the safety critical issues associated with
sending and receiving data among vehicles and between moving vehicles and fixed roadside
access points. These provide low-latency data-only V2V and V2I communications for use in
applications such as Electronic Fee Collection (EFC), crash avoidance, In-Vehicle Signing and
Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (CACC) (1). The term “DSRC” originally was used to
refer to tolling systems at 5.8 GHz. Now the term is also used to refer to DSRC operation at 5.9
GHz under the IEEE 802.11p standard).
Deep Learning
A subset of machine learning that involves many layers of processing, massive amount of data,
and enormous computing capacity. Deep learning algorithms can facilitate computer vision,
natural language processing, driving strategy, personalization, and decision-making (7).
Digital Instrument Cluster
A digital panel or dash inside the vehicle that includes instruments such as a speedometer, fuel
gauge, and odometer (7).
Driver Alertness Monitoring
One of the ADAS applications that monitors driver behavior for indications of drowsy or
distracted driving. When warranted, the system provides visual and audible alerts advising the
driver to take rest (6).
Driverless Car Sharing
In terms of the future Driverless era, the meaning of Car Sharing will be the use of one’s own
Autonomous Vehicle, hired by others, during times that the owner does not require to use it.
Alternatively, a Driverless Vehicle owned by a hire company can be shared / rented by many on
a daily, hourly, or more likely, per journey basis (3).
Driverless Vehicle
See “Terminologies for a Vehicle with Automation Capability” and “Levels of Driving
Automation”. 
9
Driving Volatility
Liability of driving behaviors to change rapidly and unexpectedly, especially for the worse, that
can be measured by the key measures of longitudinal and lateral acceleration (5). Driving
behaviors however, can also be captured by other measures, such as steering angles and the
position of the accelerator or brake in a vehicle (10).
Dynamic Driving Task
Various activities required to operate a moving vehicle in an environment that changes due to
alignment, weather, roadside conditions, etc. These tasks include steering, braking, accelerating,
etc. (23).
Early Adopter
A person, company, municipality or country that starts using technology including a CV product
as soon as it becomes available (5). In general, this term is also used for referring to people who
become the first users of any other sort of technology.
Electronic Brake Force Distribution
A system that helps reduce stopping distances by using ABS components to vary front-to-rear
braking force. The system compensates for different vehicle loads, and distributes normal weight
transfer to the front axle during a stop (6).
Electronic Control Unit (ECU)
A unit embedded in the vehicle that controls one or more electrical systems, such as the engine
control unit or the human-machine interface (7).
Electronic Stability Control (ESC)
A system that provides selective wheel braking to improve vehicle handling and help drivers
regain control in certain extreme circumstances. ESC employs components of the anti-lock
braking system and is required on all passenger vehicles starting with the 2012 model year.
Systems on SUVs generally also incorporate Rollover Mitigation (6).
Extended Floating Car Data (XFCD)
An extension of floating car data (FCD) (1) that uses additional information from all advanced
driver assistance systems (11).
Far Infrared Sensors (FIRS)
A heat sensing product used by vehicle manufacturers to capture a heat profile of living objects
in low or even zero light situations to detect the existence of pedestrians on or near the road at
night time or in poor visibility. FIRS helps alleviate the limitation of traditional night vision
camera sensors that cannot operate optimally with low light conditions, and allows better
recognition of pedestrians for fully Autonomous Vehicle systems (3).
Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)
An integrated circuit that can be configured after manufacturing, offering more flexibility than
CPUs or GPUs. It is often used as an accelerator and excels at parallel processing. See also “InVehicle Compute and “Intel® Arria® Series FPGAs” (7). 
10
Floating Car Data (FCD)
Data (or a method to collect the data) of vehicles currently being driven (20). In particular, FCD
is the data about a vehicle’s movement and location while it is in motion and when it is
stationary, e.g. in congestion, at traffic lights or in waiting areas (a data set containing at least a
time stamp and the location’s coordinates). In floating car data, cars become mobile sensors or
software agents (11).
Freight Signal Priority (FSP)
A method of signal priority that provides right of way at signals near freight facilities based on
current and projected freight movements (4).
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)
A specialized electronic circuit designed to accelerate image and graphics processing. GPUs
excel at parallel processing. See also “In-Vehicle Compute” (7).
Heterogeneous Architecture
A combination of multiple types of compute functions—such as CPUs, FPGAs, and ASICs—
working together in a complementary fashion (7).
Highly Automated Vehicles (HAV)
SAE Levels 3-5 vehicles with automated systems that are responsible for monitoring the driving
environment, in order to draw a distinction between Levels 0-2 and 3-5 based on whether the
human operator or the automated system is primarily responsible for monitoring the driving
environment (39).
High Intensity Discharge (HID) Headlights:
Headlights that use high voltage to ionize a mix of gases, including xenon, in a special bulb to
produce an extra-white or even bluish light that is several times brighter than a conventional
halogen headlight (6).
Human Machine Interface (HMI)
An interface responsible for two-way communication between a vehicle and its occupants. An
HMI may incorporate touchscreen displays, voice recognition, or integration with mobile
devices. It enables a human being to interact with a machine (11).
Head Up Display (HUD)
A display of important information within the user’s field of vision (11).
Incident Scene Pre-Arrival Staging Guidance for Emergency Responders (RESP-STG)
An application providing information to public safety responders while en-route to help guide
them safely and efficiently to an incident scene (4).
Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
Various types of technologies that are used for processing and delivering information and
communication (11). 
11
Infrastructure Device
Any piece of equipment connected to the cooperative system that is placed on the roads, bridges,
rail-lines, and similar public works that are on or near a transportation system or other public
institution (1).
Internet of Things (IoT)
A network of physical objects—devices, vehicles, buildings, machines, and other items—
embedded with electronics, software, sensors, and network connectivity that enables these
objects to collect and exchange data. In its simplest terms, the IoT is about physical “things” with
the ability to sense, actuate, and communicate (21). According to Gartner, Inc., connected things
would reach 25 billion by 2020 (3).
Internet of Vehicles (IoV)
A network of vehicles defined as an integration of three networks: an inter-vehicle network, an
intra-vehicle network, and vehicular mobile network. Based on this concept of three networks
integrated into one, the Internet of Vehicles is defined as a large-scale distributed system for
wireless communication and information exchange between vehicle, road, human and Internet,
according to agreed communication protocols and data interaction standards (3).
Interoperability
The ability of a system to communicate with other systems to provide the same service in
different physical locations. It is also the ability of one system (or component) to replace another
without degrading the service being provided. The term is frequently used in the context of
public safety communications and Dedicated Short-Range Communications (DSRC) (1). For
example:
 It is critical that transportation agency communications systems be interoperable with
those of the other responders with whom they will be working at incident scenes.
Interoperability is an important issue for law enforcement, fire-fighting, emergency
services, and other public health and safety departments because first responders need to
be able to communicate during wide scale emergencies. The nation’s lack of
interoperability in the public safety realm became evident during the September 11, 2001,
attacks on the Pentagon and World Trade Center structures.
 Standards for DSRC are intended to meet the requirements of applications that
depend upon transferring information between vehicles and roadside devices as well as
between vehicles themselves. SAE J2735 (DSRC Message Set Dictionary) is to support
interoperability among DSRC applications (22).
Intel Atom® Automotive Processors
A generation of Intel Atom processors that powers in-vehicle experiences and ADAS. These
processors offer substantial computing capacity in a low-power package. See also “ADAS”; “InVehicle Compute”; and “In-Vehicle Experiences” (7).
Intel® Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs)
Programmable Arrays, formerly owned by Altera and acquired by Intel, offering flexible invehicle compute and power-performance-efficient acceleration to support autonomous driving. 
12
These FPGAs deliver a combination of high performance and power efficiency for acceleration
(7).
Intel® GO™ Automotive Solutions
A portfolio of solutions designed for autonomous driving and in vehicle experiences. Ranging
from car to cloud, these solutions include development platforms for in vehicle computing, a 5G
connectivity platform, a software development kit and data center technologies (7).
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) Architecture
A framework within which interrelated systems can be built that work together to deliver
transportation services. It defines how systems functionally operate and the interconnection of
information exchanges that must take place between these systems to accomplish transportation
services (52).
Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) Architecture
A framework within which interrelated systems can be built that work together to deliver
transportation services. It defines how systems functionally operate and the interconnection of
information exchanges that must take place between these systems to accomplish transportation
services (52). The National ITS Architecture, entitled the Architecture Reference for
Cooperative and Intelligent Transportation (ARC-IT), provides a starting point creation of
regional ITS architectures and project ITS architectures and can be found at
http://local.iteris.com/arc-it/ (34).
Intel® Xeon® Processors
CPUs that deliver high-performance in-vehicle compute for level 4 and 5 driving automation.
See also “In-Vehicle Compute” (7).
In-Vehicle Compute
Any or all computing systems inside the vehicle that power autonomous driving, advanced driver
assistance systems (ADAS), or in-vehicle experiences. See also “Application-Specific Integrated
Circuit (ASIC)”; “Central Processing Unit (CPU)”; “Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)”;
“Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)”; “Intel Atom® Automotive Processors”; and “Intel® Xeon®
Processors” (7).
In-Vehicle Experiences (IVE)
The intuitive experiences inside the vehicle that provide driver assistance, information, and
entertainment, while often enhancing safety. These are delivered by a range of systems,
including in-vehicle infotainment (IVI), digital instrument clusters, and advanced driver
assistance systems (ADAS) (7).
In-Vehicle Infotainment (IVI)
A collection of hardware and software that provide entertainment in the vehicle; for example,
navigation systems, radio, video players, and Wi-Fi (7). 
13
ITS Ad Hoc Domain
The ad hoc communications between different ITS stations such as those at the roadside and in
vehicles, using communications protocols such as 802.11p. It includes the necessary measures to
maintain privacy, security and trustworthiness in the communication (1).
ITS Station
A collection of functional components that participate in the provision of ITS services at a
particular location. Thus, an ITS Station may exist in a vehicle, at the roadside, in a central
location such as a TMC, or in a mobile device. Note that it has two meanings: (1) functional and
(2) physical, i.e. an actual physical device (1).
Levels of Driving Automation
The six levels of driving automation, defined in the “Standard J3016: Taxonomy and Definitions
for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Systems” by the Society of
Automotive Engineers (SAE) (23). A summary table and more descriptions from the two-page
summary of SAE J3016 (24) are presented below.
 A key distinction is between level 2, where the human driver performs part of the
dynamic driving task, and level 3, where the automated driving system performs the
entire dynamic driving task.
 System refers to the driver assistance system, combination of driver assistance systems,
or automated driving system.
 Some of key definitions in J3016 include: 
14
o Dynamic driving task includes the operational (steering, braking, accelerating,
monitoring the vehicle and roadway) and tactical (responding to events,
determining when to change lanes, turn, use signals, etc.) aspects of the driving
task, but not the strategic (determining destinations and waypoints) aspect of the
driving task.
o Driving mode is a type of driving scenario with characteristic dynamic driving
task requirements (e.g., expressway merging, high speed cruising, low speed
traffic jam, closed-campus operations, etc.).
o Request to intervene is notification by the automated driving system to a human
driver that s/he should promptly begin or resume performance of the dynamic
driving task.
A couple of example applications are provided below to show how an application can evolve
through the levels of automation, exerted and modified from the “Automated and Autonomous
Driving” report (54).
Example 1: Driving Application
 Level 1 (Driver Assistance) – Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC) including stop-and-go
function: Adaptive cruise control with stop and go function includes automatic distance
control and, within the limits of the system, detects a preceding vehicle. It maintains a
safe distance by automatically applying the brakes and accelerating. A driver still is
responsible for controlling the steering wheel.
 Level 2 (Partial Automation) – Traffic Jam Assist: The system controls
forward/backward as well as sideways movements of the vehicle in order to follow traffic
flow. The system can be seen as an extension of the ACC with stop-and-go functionality,
with an addition of an automated lateral movement control. A driver does not have to
control the vehicle; but still must monitor the roadway and stay vigilant to the system and
be ready to take back control of the vehicle when requested by the system.
 Level 3 (Conditional Automation) – Highway Chauffeur: Conditional automated
driving on motorways or motorway-like roads. The Highway Chauffeur operates from
entrance to exit, on all lanes, including overtaking movements. The driver must
deliberately activate the system and can override or switch off the system at all times. A
driver does not have to control the vehicle and does not have to monitor the roadway; but
must stay vigilant to the system and be ready to take back control of the vehicle when
requested by the system. There are no requests from the system to the driver to take over
when the system is in its normal operation but the system will request the driver to take
over within a specific time, if automation reaches the system limits.
 Level 4 (High Automation) – Highway Pilot: Automated driving on motorways or
motorway-like roads, on all lanes, including overtaking movements. The driver must
deliberately activate the system and can override or switch off the system at all times. A
driver does not have to control the vehicle and does not have to monitor the roadway; but
must stay vigilant to the system and be ready to take back control of the vehicle when
requested by the system. However, in Level 4, the vehicle is supposed to be able to
respond to the situation even when a drive does not response appropriately. There are no
requests from the system to the driver to take over when the system is in its normal 
15
operation but the system will request the driver to take over within a specific time, if
automation reaches the system limits.
 Level 5 (Full Automation) – Fully automated private vehicle: The fully automated
vehicle should be able to handle all driving from point A to B, without any input from the
passenger. The driver can at all times override or switch off the system. No consensus
exists as to when such systems will become commercially available.
Example 2: Parking Application
 Level 0 (No Automation) – Park Distance Control: The Park Distance Control system
assists the driver to manoeuvre into tight spaces and reduces stress by communicating
distance from obstacles by means of acoustic or, depending on vehicle, optical signals.
Note that no action is automated here. Rather the goal of the system is solely to provide
better information to drivers while they perform all of the parking task.
 Level 1 (Driver Assistance) – Park Assist: The Park Assist function automatically
steers the car into parallel and bay parking spaces, and also out of parallel parking spaces.
The system assists the driver by automatically carrying out the optimum steering
movements in order to reverse-park on the ideal line. The measurement of the parking
space, the allocation of the starting position and the steering movements are
automatically undertaken by Park Assist – all the driver has to do is operate the
accelerator and the brake. This means that the driver retains control of the car at all times.
 Level 2 (Partial Automation) – Park Assist: Partial automated parking into and out of a
parking space in a public or private parking area or garage. The process is initiated
remotely, e.g. via smartphone or adapted remote key. The vehicle carries out the
manoeuvre by itself. The driver can be located outside of the vehicle, but has to monitor
the system and can stop the parking manoeuvre if required.
 Level 4 (High Automation) – Parking Garage Pilot: Highly automated parking
including manoeuvring to and from parking place (driverless valet parking). In parking
garages, the driver does not have to monitor the operation and may leave once the system
is active. The process is initiated remotely, for instance via a smartphone or an adapted
remote key.
Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR)
An expensive, but extremely accurate technology, which is effectively a Laser based version of
Radar and used in autonomous vehicles. The LIDAR unit, usually sits on top of the vehicle roof
to enable unhindered 360-degree view of the area surrounding the vehicle. 64 lasers spin at about
900 rpm and create a detailed 360-degree 3D map of the surrounding environment in order to
view all obstacles in real time. This unit bounces laser beams off object surfaces up to 100m
around the autonomous vehicle and then builds a 3D picture from this raw data via the vehicles
microprocessor, to accurately determine the identity and distance of the object (3).
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Headlights
Headlights that use an array of LEDs to provide forward illumination. LED headlights provide a
“whiter” light than HID units, but they are more directional and typically produce less light
overall (6). 
16
Local Coordination
An activity to instruct equipped vehicles, or streams of equipped vehicles, already on the
highway and within a certain distance of each other to speed up or slow down to facilitate
clustering. This local coordination effort helps creating a cluster to support CV applications such
as Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control (CACC) (2). Also see “Ad Hoc Clustering”.
Long Term Evolution (LTE)
A mobile telephone standard that accelerates the expansion of mobile Internet use. LTE allows
data transfer rates of between 100 and 300 Mbps, and can be used to rapidly download HD
movies to a car’s infotainment system, for example – even while the vehicle is in motion (11).
Machine Learning
A subset of AI that gives machines the ability to learn on their own, resulting in algorithms that
make data-driven decisions (7).
Machine Vision
A technology used to provide imaging-based automatic inspection and analysis for such
applications as automated inspection, process control, and robot guidance, usually in industry.
Machine vision is a term encompassing a large number of technologies, software and hardware
products, integrated systems, actions, methods and expertise (45).
Mobility as a Service (MaaS)
The integration of various forms of transport services into a single mobility service accessible on
demand. To meet a customer’s request, a MaaS operator facilitates a diverse menu of transport
options such as public transport, ride-, car- or bike-sharing, taxi or car rental/lease, or a
combination thereof. For the user, MaaS can offer added value through use of a single
application to provide access to mobility, with a single payment channel instead of multiple
ticketing and payment operations (38).
Mobility Connection Protection (MCP)
An application providing passengers with real-time journey information across various transport
modes to allow them to more accurately predict whether they will make their next connection.
Travellers can use their mobile devices to make a request for a connection to wait. If multiple
people on a delayed transit vehicle will miss their next connection, transportation providers can
adjust departures to enable the passengers to make their next connection (3).
Natural Language Processing (NLP)
A form of AI that enables the vehicle to understand and respond to natural human speech (7).
The computer must recognize what language we are using and then interpret what we say into a
question it understands. It must then find the answer and then phrase the response in our
language. NLP is an area of artificial intelligence research that is attempting to do just that (25).
National Transportation Communications for ITS Protocol (NTCIP)
A family of standards that provides both the rules for communicating (called protocols) and the
vocabulary (called objects) necessary to allow electronic traffic control equipment from different
manufacturers to operate with each other as a system. The NTCIP is the first set of standards for 
17
the transportation industry that allows traffic control systems to be built using a “mix and match”
approach with equipment from different manufacturers. Therefore, NTCIP standards reduce the
need for reliance on specific equipment vendors and customized one-of-a-kind software. To
assure both manufacturer and user community support, NTCIP is a joint product of the National
Electronics Manufacturers Association (NEMA), the American Association of State highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE)
(46).
Object and Event Detection and Response
The detection by the driver or automated driving systems of any circumstance that is relevant to
the immediate driving task, as well as the implementation of the appropriate driver or system
response to such circumstance (42).
Obstacle Detection
An ADAS feature sensing slow-moving or stationary objects ahead of the vehicle, usually when
driving at low speeds, and alerting the driver with a flashing command to brake the vehicle,
along with an audible warning and/or a vibration at the steering wheel and/or in the driver’s seat
(3).
Operational Design Domain
A domain describing the specific conditions under which a given automated driving system or
feature is intended to function, in the automated driving environment. An area that is limited by
either geography or operating conditions under which a vehicle or autonomous features may be
intended to work. Examples include Freeways, downtown areas, roadways with speed limits <
35 mph (42).
Original Equipment (OE)
Components used to build the vehicle at the factory or are available as service replacements
through franchised dealers (6).
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM)
A company that produces hardware to be marketed under another company's brand name. For
example, if Samsung makes a monitor that will be marketed by Dell, a "Dell" label will get stuck
on the front, but the OEM of the monitor is Samsung (26).
On-Board Equipment (OBE)
A piece of ITS related hardware that is located in a vehicle to collect data from the vehicle and/or
provide an interface through which ITS services can be provided, e.g. tolls, navigation, trip
planning, travel information (1).
On-Board Diagnostics (OBD)
A built-in diagnostic system on all newer vehicles that monitors vehicle emissions control
systems for proper operation. Problems that cause an increase in emissions will illuminate the
“check engine” Malfunction Indicator Light (MIL) on the dash. The OBD system also provides a
standardized Diagnostic Link Connector (DLC) for attaching diagnostic tools to the vehicle (6). 
18
Opt-In Services
Services that can be provided only when a user opts in. A connected vehicle may require a user
to opt-in prior to transmitting any ‘sensitive’ data. Each opt-in prompt shall provide the user with
a full description of the data that may potentially be transmitted if the user agrees to the option
(5).
Over-the-Air (OTA) Update:
Software or firmware updates to a vehicle that are downloaded from the cloud (7). Connected
vehicles are increasingly enabled to receive remote OTA software updates and transmit
diagnostic and operational data from on-board systems and components. By leveraging vehicle
connectivity in this way automakers can significantly reduce recall expenses, improve
cybersecurity response time, increase product quality and operational efficiency (27).
Park Assist
A system of ultrasonic sensors on the front and/or rear bumpers that provide the driver with
visual, audible and/or tactile alerts as their vehicle approaches a stationary object (6). Most
manufacturers are incorporating this feature into vehicles that perform self-parallel parking.
Perception (sense)
The first of the three stages of in-vehicle compute required for autonomous driving (sense, fuse,
decide). In this stage, the vehicle collects data from dozens of sensors, including LIDAR, radar,
and cameras (7).
Platooning
A method of grouping vehicles together, primarily to increase the road capacity, which will lead
up to fully automated vehicles on a wide scale. Platooning will decrease the distances between
cars or trucks and would allow vehicles to accelerate or brake simultaneously. This method also
allows for a closer headway between vehicles by eliminating reacting distance needed for human
reaction (28). Smart cars (e.g. autonomous vehicles) with artificial intelligence could
automatically join and leave platoons (3).
Privacy
The ability of an individual or group to seclude themselves or seclude information about
themselves, thereby revealing themselves selectively (1). Privacy is considered a huge concern
with connected vehicle operation since a lot of communication takes place in an environment
that may risk the privacy of users.
Rain-Sensing Wipers
Windshield wipers whose rate of operation is electronically controlled based on the amount of
moisture on the windshield (6).
Rear View Camera
A camera mounted at the back of a vehicle that displays a picture on a screen in the dash or rearview mirror of what is behind the vehicle when the transmission is in reverse (6). 
19
Real Time Data (RTD)
Data that are collected continuously and made available for immediate processing. Vehicle RTD
includes information about vehicles such as current fuel consumption, braking behavior and
temperature, and information on the current level of traffic or the state of the road ahead (11).
Real Time Kinematics (RTK)
A differential global navigation satellite system (GNSS) technique which provides high
positioning performance in the vicinity of a base station. The technique is based on the use of
carrier measurements and the transmission of corrections from the base station, whose location is
well known, to the rover, so that the main errors that drive the stand-alone positioning cancel out.
A RTK base station covers a service area spreading about 10 or 20 kilometers and a real-time
communication channel is needed connecting base and rover. RTK, which achieves
performances in the range of a few centimeters, is a technique commonly used in surveying
applications (44).
Real Time Traffic Information (RTTI)
A service that provides drivers with information about the current state of traffic in a road
network. It is updated to show how conditions are changing and may apply to all or part(s) of the
road network (1).
Reinforcement Learning
An area of machine learning inspired by behaviorist psychology, concerned with how software
agent ought to take actions in an environment so as to maximize some notion of cumulative
reward. Reinforcement learning differs from standard supervised learning in that correct
input/output pairs are never presented, nor sub-optimal actions explicitly corrected (41).
Retrofit Device
A component that has been installed after a vehicle or part of the transport infrastructure was
constructed. To retrofit is to install on-board equipment into existing vehicles for communication
with other vehicles, the infrastructure or portable communication devices. Retrofits are done with
the involvement of the vehicle manufacturer, as contrasted with aftermarket modifications,
which do not involve the vehicle manufacturer. Retrofitted devices, therefore, can access
proprietary vehicle-based data (1).
Roadside Equipment (RSE)
A piece of ITS related hardware located at the side of the road, exchanging data with vehicles in
its locality and in some instances, providing an interface through which travelers can access ITS
related services, e.g. Public Transport schedules (1). The term Roadside Equipment (RSE) has
been used to describe a broader set of field equipment, incorporating the narrowly-defined RSU
and other functional components such as applications. See also “Roadside Unit”.
Roadside Unit (RSU)
A DSRC transceiver that is mounted along a road or pedestrian passageway. An RSU may also
be mounted on a vehicle or is hand carried, but it may only operate when the vehicle or hand
carried unit is stationary. Furthermore, an RSU operating under this part is restricted to the
location where it is licensed to operate. However, portable or hand-held RSUs are permitted to 
20
operate where they do not interfere with a site licensed operation. A RSU broadcasts data to
OBUs or exchanges data with OBUs in its communications zone. An RSU also provides channel
assignments and operating instructions to OBUs in its communications zone, when required (5).
See also “Roadside Equipment”.
Security Credential Management System (SCMS)
Security system for cooperative vehicle-to-vehicle crash avoidance applications using 5.9 GHz
DSRC wireless communications (5).
Self-Driving Vehicle
See “Terminologies for a Vehicle with Automation Capability” and “Levels of Driving
Automation”.
Sensor Fusion (fuse)
The second of the three stages of in-vehicle compute required for autonomous driving (sense,
fuse, decide). In this stage, the vehicle correlates and fuses sensor data to create a model of its
environment (7).
Signal Phase and Timing (SPaT)
The signal state of the intersection and how long this state will persist for each approach and lane
that is active, according to the SPaT Benefits Report. The SPaT message sends the current state
of each phase, with all-red intervals not transmitted. Movements are given to specific lanes and
approaches by use of the lane numbers present in the message. In a connected vehicle
environment, the message is sent from the roadway infrastructure to approaching vehicles (1).
Smart Park
A United States Department of Transportation (USDOT) Federal Motor Carriers Safety
Administration (FMCSA) (8) (29) project to demonstrate technology for conveying real-time
information on parking availability to truckers on the road (1).
Social Equity
The situation in which all people within a society or group have the same status with respect to
access to and use of CV technology and products (5).
Software Development Kit (SDK)
A set of tools—such as performance libraries, leading compilers, performance and power
analyzers, and debuggers—that speeds the time it takes for developers to build software (7).
Standard Message Sets
A set of messages which are the primary means by which vehicles communicate with each other
and with the roadway infrastructure. Two of the representative standard message sets are SAE
J2735 and SAE J2945, defined by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) (47). J2735
defines format and structure of message, data frames and data elements for exchanging V2V and
V2I information while J2945 describes use cases and performance requirements for J2735
messages (48). Please see “Table 2 SAE J2945 Standard Message Set” and “Table 3 SAE J2735
Standard Message Set” in the appendix for details. 
21
Telematics
A multi-discipline term, encompassing telecommunications, vehicular technologies, road
transportation, road safety, electrical/electronic engineering, multimedia, wireless and Internet
technologies. Telematics can involve sending, receiving and storing information via telecom
devices, to enable control of remote objects. Vehicle Telematics, (which is most Telematics
usage today) specifically defines the use of such systems within road vehicles, including GPS
navigation, integrated hands-free cell phones, wireless safety communications and ADAS (3).
Terminologies for a Vehicle with Automation Capability
The terminologies that have been widely used to call a vehicle with the automation capability.
These are an automated vehicle, an autonomous vehicle, a self-driving vehicle, and a driverless
vehicle. It should be noted that some people use these terminologies interchangeably without any
clear distinctions while other people attempt to differentiate the terminologies and use a specific
term over the other. One of the example comparisons of these four terminologies is provided
below:
“Today, most people use the terms Autonomous, Automated, Self-Driving, and
Driverless as interchangeable. Yet some people in the field make a point of the
differences. If I understand these differences correctly, a self-driving car is not as
advanced as driverless, in that driverless doesn’t have the back-up of a person taking
control, and self-driving might. Driverless taxis are not merely self-driving, they pick up
passengers and may be personless. In SAE terms, driverless is Level 5, while self-driving
is Level 4 or below. Generally, the difference between automatic (or automated) and
autonomous is the degree of human intervention. An automated car does not have the
level of intelligence or independence that an autonomous car has. So driverless and
autonomous are nearer to synonyms, as are self-driving and automated. A truly
autonomous car would decide on destination and route as well as control within the lanes.
An automated car would follow orders about destination and route, and may only adopt
some lane-keeping or car-following guidance (55).”
Given that there is no consensus on the definitions of these terminologies as of now, a few
example definitions from the existing source are provided below.
 Automated Vehicle:
o A vehicle in which at least some aspects of a safety-critical control function (e.g.,
steering, throttle, or braking) occur without direct driver input. Vehicles that
provide safety warnings to drivers (forward crash warning, for example) but do
not perform a control function are, in this context, not considered automated, even
though the technology necessary to provide that warning involves varying degrees
of automation (e.g., the necessary data are received and processed, and the
warning is given, without driver input). Automated vehicles may use onboard
sensors, cameras, GPS, and telecommunications to obtain information in order to
make their own judgments regarding safety-critical situations and act
appropriately by effectuating control at some level (57).
 Self-Driving Vehicle:
o A vehicle having the ability to drive by itself using onboard sensors, without the
need of any intervention from human driver (3).
22
o A self-driving car is not as advanced as driverless, in that driverless doesn’t have
the back-up of a person taking control, and self-driving might. Driverless taxis are
not merely self-driving, they pick up passengers and may be personless. In SAE
terms, driverless is Level 5, while self-driving is Level 4 or below (55).
 Autonomous Vehicle:
o A vehicle that is capable of sensing its environment and navigating without
human input. A human may select a destination but is not required to
mechanically operate the vehicle. Autonomous vehicles sense their surroundings
with such techniques as radar, LIDAR, GPS technology, or computer vision.
Advanced control systems on board the vehicle then interpret the sensor
information to identify the appropriate navigation paths and obstacles and
interpret the relevant signs (56). Given that driverless and autonomous are nearer
to synonyms, autonomous is Level 5 in SAE terms (55).
o A vehicle in which vehicle operation occurs without direct human driver input to
control key functions such as steering, acceleration, and braking. There are
various degrees of autonomy, but future systems will be principally designed so
that the vehicle's passenger is not required to monitor the roadway or intervene in
the operation of the vehicles in any way (3).
 Driverless Vehicle:
o A driverless car (sometimes called a self-driving car, an automated car or
an autonomous vehicle) is a robotic vehicle that is designed to travel between
destinations without a human operator. To qualify as fully autonomous, a vehicle
must be able to navigate without human intervention to a predetermined
destination over roads that have not been adapted for its use (53).
Traction Control System (TCS)
A system that uses the ABS components to limit wheel spin when accelerating on slippery
surfaces. More advanced systems can also retard engine spark timing and automatically back off
the throttle when necessary to control wheel spin (6).
Transit Signal Priority (TSP)
A signal system that allows transit agencies to manage service by granting bus right of way at a
traffic signal based on a number of factors, such as schedule adherence or passenger loads (30),
(31), (32).
An operational strategy that facilitates the movement of transit vehicles, either buses or
streetcars, through traffic-signal controlled intersections. Objectives of TSP include improved
schedule adherence and improved transit travel time efficiency while minimizing impacts to
normal traffic operations e trips by providing travelers with choices relative to route, time, and
mode (52).
Vehicle Application
A software program with an interface that provides functionality enabling people to realize
safety, mobility, environmental, or other benefits (5)(4). The term “app” applies in general to any
form of application software. Nowadays, however, it is used mostly to refer to applications for
smartphones and tablet computers, which are acquired from an online shop integrated into the 
23
operating system and can therefore be installed directly on the smartphone. In the automotive
context, there are apps for motorists to aid navigation or display parking ticket vending
machines, for example (11).
Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) Communication
A communication that promotes the exchange of information between the vehicles and the
infrastructure (11).
Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) Communication
A communication that promotes the exchange of information between vehicles (11).
Vehicle to X (V2X) Communication
Pronounced “vehicle to many”, a communication that promotes the exchange of information
between the vehicles and various counterparts including other means of transport, the
infrastructure, traffic management centers and various Internet applications (11).
A communication allowing the car to communicate with various, non-vehicle located, smart
enabled road infrastructure, such as electronics built in to traffic signals, stoplights, speed signs,
bollards, barriers, message boards etc. (3).
Vision Processing
The technologies used to provide image-based analysis (also called machine vision) (7).
Computer vision processing provides quantitative and qualitative information from visual data.
Much like the process of visual reasoning of human vision; it can distinguish between objects,
classify them, sort them according to their size, and so forth. Computer vision, like image
processing, takes images as input. However, it returns another type of output, namely
information on size, color, number, etc. In general, image processing methods are harnessed for
achieving tasks of computer vision (33).
Wireless Access for Vehicular Environments (WAVE)
A vehicular communication system that was an amendment to the existing IEEE 802.11 wireless
standard that adds wireless access in vehicular environments, known as WAVE. IEEE802.11p
lays down certain enhancements to the existing wireless 802.11 to enable support of Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS) applications. This support includes the exchange of data between
vehicle to vehicle and also vehicle to infrastructure, known as V2V and V2X, which will be vital
data resources in the Autonomous driving era (3).
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
A local radio network usually operating to a specification from the IEEE-802.11 family. In some
countries, the term Wi-Fi is commonly used for this narrower meaning, although it is frequently
regarded as synonymous (11). 
24
REFERENCES
1. USDOT. Glossary of Terms for Connected Vehicles 2009 to Present.
http://connectedvehicle.itsa.wikispaces.net/Glossary+of+Terms+for+EUUS+cooperation+in+ITS#x-Glossary of Terms for EU-US Cooperation, 2009-PresentVersion 7, 2012. Accessed Jan. 1, 2017.
2. Shladover, S. E., R. F. Station, and X. Lu. Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control
Definitions and Operating Concepts. Journal of Transportatation Research Record, Vol.
2489, 2015, pp. 1–16. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3141/2489-17.
3. Driverless.global. Terms for Driverless Vehicle Systems.
http://www.driverless.global/glossary. Accessed Jan. 1, 2017.
4. USDOT. Intelligent Transportation Systems ePrimer. United States Department of
Transportation, 2013.
5. FHWA. Connected Vehicle Terms OSADP.
https://www.itsforge.net/index.php/information/glossary-of-terms. Accessed Jan. 1, 2017.
6. AAA. Automotive Glossary.
https://www.aaa.com/AAA/common/AAR/files/Automotive-Glossary.docx.
7. Intel. Autonomous Driving Glossary. https://newsroom.intel.com/wpcontent/uploads/sites/11/2017/05/Autonomous-Driving-Glossary.pdf.
8. USDOT. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. https://www.nhtsa.gov/.
Accessed Aug. 24, 2017.
9. Safecar.go. Automated Emergency Braking. National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. https://www.safercar.gov/Vehicle-Shoppers/SafetyTechnology/AEB/aeb. Accessed Aug. 23, 2017.
10. Liu, J., and A. J. Khattak. Delivering Improved Alerts, Warnings, and Control Assistance
Using Basic Safety Messages Transmitted between Connected Vehicles. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 68, 2016, pp. 83–100.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.03.009.
11. IAAA. Connected Car Glossary. http://www.connectedcarguide.com/en/glossary.
Accessed Jul. 8, 2017.
12. Azure, M. Cloud Computing Terms. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/overview/cloudcomputing-dictionary/. Accessed Jan. 1, 2017.
13. Azure, M. Computer Vision API. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitiveservices/computer-vision/. Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
14. Neudorff, L. G., J. Mason, and J. Bauer. Glossary of Regional Transportation Systems
Management and Operations Terms. Transportation Research Board 500 Fifth Street,
NW Washington, DC 20001. August 2012. 1–29.
http://onlinepubs.trb.org/onlinepubs/circulars/ec166.pdf.
15. USDOT. Connected Vehicle Basics.
https://www.its.dot.gov/cv_basics/cv_basics_what.htm. Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
16. CAAT. Connected and Automated Vehicles. Center for Advanced Automotive Research.
http://autocaat.org/Technologies/Automated_and_Connected_Vehicles/. Accessed Aug.
30, 2017.
17. Trabalza, D., S. Raza, and T. Voigt. Wireless Sensor Networks for Developing Countries.
Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 366, No. April, 2013, pp.
108–119. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41054-3. 
25
18. ETSI-TS. Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic Set of
Applications; Part 2: Specification of Cooperative Awareness Basic Service, Technical
Specification (March 2011).
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_ts/102600_102699/10263702/01.02.01_60/ts_10263702v
010201p.pdf. Accessed Aug. 26, 2017.
19. Argote-Cabañero, J., E. Christofa, and A. Skabardonis. Connected Vehicle Penetration
Rate for Estimation of Arterial Measures of Effectiveness. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies, Vol. 60, 2015, pp. 298–312.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2015.08.013.
20. Pfoser, D. Floating Car Data. Encyclopedia of GIS, 2008, pp. 321–323.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-35973-1_423.USDOT.
21. Opto-22. Internet of Things - Glossary of Terms. http://info.opto22.com/internet-ofthings-glossary-of-terms. Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
22. USDOT. ITS Research 2015-2019 Interoperability. Intelligent Transportation Systems
Joint Office. https://www.its.dot.gov/research_areas/interoperability.htm. Accessed Aug.
30, 2017.
23. SAE International. Standard SAE J3016: Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to
On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Systems. 2016.
24. SAE International. Automative Driving: Levels of Driving Automation. A two-page
summary of SAE J3016.
http://media.cygnus.com/files/base/MASS/document/2017/04/automated_driving.pdf.
Accessed Jan. 1, 2018.
25. Stanford. SKIL Glossary. https://web.stanford.edu/group/vpue/skil/glossary/natlang.htm.
Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
26. TechTerms. Technical Term Definitions. https://techterms.com/definition/oem. Accessed
Aug. 26, 2017.
27. Airbiquity. OTA Software and Data Management. https://www.airbiquity.com/productofferings/software-and-data-management. Accessed Aug. 26, 2017.
28. ACEA. Truck Platooning. European Automobile Manufacturers Association.
https://www.acea.be/uploads/publications/Platooning_roadmap.pdf. Accessed Aug. 26,
2017.
29. USDOT. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration. https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/.
Accessed Aug. 26, 2017.
30. Toyota. Introduction to Electronic Signals. Electronic Circuit Diagnostics.
http://www.autoshop101.com/forms/elec06.pdf. Accessed Aug. 26, 2017.
31. USDOT. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Federal Highway Administration.
https://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/pdfs/2009r1r2/mutcd2009r1r2edition.pdf.
32. USDOT. Traffic Signals. Brief Issue on Safe Roads.
https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/intersection/other_topics/fhwasa09027/resources/Intersection
Safety Issue Brief 5.pdf. Accessed Aug. 23, 2017.
33. Vision, R. Difference Between Computer Vision, Image Processing and Machine
Learning. http://www.rsipvision.com/defining-borders/. Accessed Aug. 25, 2017.
34. USDOT. Architecture Reference for Cooperative and Intelligent Transportation.
http://local.iteris.com/arc-it/. Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
35. USDOT. Concept Development and Needs Identification for Intelligent Network Flow
Optimization (INFLO). Research and Technology Development Organization, United 
26
States Department of Transportation, 2012.
36. USDOT. Intelligent Transportation Systems Joint Program Office Mobility Research
Archive. https://www.its.dot.gov/research_archives/dma/dma_development.htm.
Accessed Aug. 30, 2017.
37. Techopedia. Application-Specific Integrated Circuit.
https://www.techopedia.com/definition/2357/application-specific-integrated-circuit-asic.
Accessed Aug 30, 2017.
38. Mobility as a Service Alliance Website. https://maas-alliance.eu/homepage/what-ismaas/. Accessed Sept 18, 2017
39. USDOT. Federal Automated Vehicles Policy. September 2016.
40. De Mauro, Andrea; Greco, Marco; Grimaldi, Michele (2016). A Formal definition of Big
Data based on its essential Features. Library Review. 65: 122–135. doi:10.1108/LR-06-
2015-0061
41. Reinforcement Learning Wikipedia Website.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning. Accessed October 13, 2017.
42. USDOT. Automated Driving Systems: A Vision for Safety. September 2017.
43. Automated Driving System Wikipedia Website.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_driving_system. Accessed October 13, 2017.
44. RTK Standards Navipedia. http://www.navipedia.net/index.php/RTK_Standards.
Accessed October 13, 2017.
45. Machine Vision Wikipedia Website. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_vision.
Accessed October 13, 2017.
46. NTCIP. Background Information. https://www.ntcip.org/info/. Accessed October 13,
2017.
47. Jim Misener. SAE Connected Vehicle Standards. SAE International.
http://www.sae.org/events/ces/2016/attend/program/presentations/misener.pdf. Accessed
Oct 27, 2017.
48. Frank Perry. Overview of DSRC Messages and Performance Requirements.
http://www.transportation.institute.ufl.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/HNTB-SAEStandards.pdf. Accessed Oct 27, 2017.
49. Sdx. What is Cloud? https://www.sdxcentral.com/cloud/definitions/what-is-cloud/.
Accessed: Oct, 27, 2017
50. Rouse, M. Cybersecurity. http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/cybersecurity.
Accessed: Oct, 28, 2017
51. Richard Deering. Crash Avoidance Metrics Partnership. National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. 2002
52. Glossary. National Operations Center of Excellence.
https://transportationops.org//resources/glossary. Accessed: Nov, 21, 2017
53. TechTarget. Driverless Car. http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/driverless-car.
Accessed: January 2018
54. International Transport Forum of OECD. Automated and Autonomous Driving. 2015.
https://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/files/publication/files/15CPB_AutonomousDriving.pdf
55. David Levinson. On the Differences between Autonomous, Automated, Self-Driving, and
Driverless Cars. https://transportist.org/2017/06/29/on-the-differences-betweenautonomous-automated-self-driving-and-driverless-cars/. Accessed: February 2018.
56. ITS Professional Capacity Building Program of USDOT. ITS ePrimer – Module 13: 
27
Connected Vehicles. https://www.pcb.its.dot.gov/eprimer/module13.aspx. Accessed:
February 2018.
57. USDOT, NHTSA. Preliminary Statement of Policy Concerning Automated Vehicles.
2016. https://www.nhtsa.gov/staticfiles/rulemaking/pdf/Autonomous-Vehicles-PolicyUpdate-2016.pdf. Accessed: February 2018.
 
28
APPENDIX
Table 3 SAE J2945 Standard Message Set (47) (48)
Message Attributes
J2945/0 Common Requirements for (DSRC) Minimum Performance (also called “base” or
“slash zero”)
J2945/1 On-board Minimum Performance Requirements for V2V Safety Systems
J2945/2 DSRC Requirements for V2V Safety Awareness
J2945/3 Weather and Road Reporting
J2945/4 Requirement for TIM
J2945/5 Mayday System Requirements
J2945/6 Performance Requirements for Coordinated Maneuvers (Platooning and CACC)
J2945/7 Performance Requirements for Transit Systems
J2945/8 Performance Requirements for Freight Systems
J2945/9 Performance Requirements for Safety Communications to Vulnerable Road Users
J2945/10 System Requirements and Guidance for using SPaT and MAP messages
Table 4 SAE JS2735 Standard Message Set (47) (48)
Message Name Attributes
#18 MAP Provides intersection and roadway lane geometry data for one
or more locations (e.g. intersections and fragments of maps).
#19 Signal Phasing and
Timing (SPaT)
Provides the current signal / phase timing data (times at which
signals will change) for one or more signalized intersections,
as well as other time of day status details.
#20 Basic Safety
Message (BSM)
Core V2V Safety Message Broadcast by vehicles to provide
 situational data (location, heading, speed, etc.) to surrounding
vehicles, used to assess threat potentials
#21 Personal Safety
Message (PSM)
Broadcast by Vulnerable Road User (VRU) devices to announ
ce
their presence to approaching vehicles
#25 Probe Data
Management
Broadcast by RSUs to instruct vehicles to adjust data (snapsh
ot)
collection thresholds and/or transmission strategy
#30 Signal Status
Message (SSM)
Broadcast by RSUs to announce pending Priority/Preemption
requests
#29 Signal Request
Message (SRM)
Broadcast by vehicles to request Priority/Pre‐emption
#31 Traveler
Information
Message (TIM)
The TIM message contains a variety of traffic condition and
“advanced traveler” messages. It provides the means to
inform the public about both incidents (traffic accidents) and
pre-planned roadwork events.
ABS - see anti-skid braking
A/C
Air conditioning
active rear-wheel steering
see passive rear-wheel steering
active suspension
A suspension system which detects changes in the road
surface and alters the suspension to suit these changes as
the car drives along.
active restraint
Something (a seatbelt for example) that restrains the
movement of a passenger during an accident and which
must be attached or connected by the person using it. A
passive restraint (such as an airbag), on the other hand,
will operate automatically.
advance
1) To make the engine fire earlier during its cycle.
2) The degree to which the engine is made to fire earlier
in its cycle.
See also timing.
aerodynamics
Aerodynamics is the study of how objects move through
the air. Generally, the smoother and more streamlined the
shape, the less wind resistance you get. An aerodynamically-designed car means one that has been designed to
move smoothly through the air. Because the car moves
more smoothly, it can go faster with less fuel. Carmakers
like to quote impressive-sounding figures (Cd, which is
short for Coefficient of Drag) to show how smoothly
their cars glide.
A-frame
1) A part of some cars’ suspension, which is shaped like the
letter A turned sideways — hence the name (A-frame is an
American term. The English term is wishbone).
2) A rig for towing one car with another. It is also shaped
like the letter A.
aftermarket
Extras such as alarms, mag wheels, body parts or decorations which are bought as add-ons after the vehicle was
purchased. They are not usually bought from the same
company that built the car, because the reason you buy aftermarket items is because they were either: not originally
supplied with the car (eg., alarms), because they improve
the car (eg., a better stereo than was originally supplied
with the vehicle), or because they are cheaper than the car
manufacturers’ own parts.
airbag
A balloon-like bag that is rapidly inflated during a collision & cushions the occupants of a vehicle, helping to
protect them from injury. A driver’s airbag protects the
driver only. Dual front airbags mean that both the driver
and front passenger are protected. Side airbags may be
fitted on both sides of either the front or rear seats, or
both. If a brochure states that a vehicle has dual front
and side/front airbags it means that both front occupants
have airbags in front of and beside them, but the rear
passengers have none. A four-door car fitted with dual
front and dual side airbags gives frontal and side protection for the front occupants and side airbags for the rear
occupants. In addition to conventional airbags, specialist
airbags that protect body parts such as the knees or ankles
are becoming common.
air brake
A braking system operated by compressed air. Usually
used on trucks rather than cars.
air cleaner
Exactly what it says - a device that cleans the air before
it goes into your car’s motor. This makes the motor last
longer and cuts down noise (a motor without an air cleaner
makes a loud whooshing noise as it operates).
air-cooled engine
An engine cooled by air instead of water. Most lawn mower motors and many Porsche engines are air cooled.
airflow sensor
An instrument which measures how much air is flowing
through an engine. Usually used with electronic fuel
injection systems to enable the computer which controls
the system to adjust the air/fuel mixture and other
engine controls.
air/fuel mixture, air/fuel ratio
Most cars’ engines work by burning fuel. The more
efficiently you burn the fuel, the more power you get
and the less fuel per kilometre you use. One key factor
in getting the fuel to burn well is to mix it with the exact
right amount of air before you burn it. This mixture of
air and fuel is called the air/fuel mixture or air/fuel ratio.
In an older-style engine the correct air/fuel mixture is
delivered by a carburettor. In more modern engines the
fuel injection system does this job.
ALB
Anti-Lock Braking. See anti-skid braking
all-wheel drive (AWD)
Most cars are pushed or pulled along by two wheels only.
All-wheel drive cars are powered by all (usually four)
wheels at once. In some cases, AWD means the same
as four-wheel drive. The exceptions are the few vehicles
that have more than four powered wheels. Also, some
‘all-wheel drive’ cars actually don’t power all four wheels
at once – they power the front or the back wheels most
of the time and then allocate power to the other wheels
as it is required. This type of ‘on demand’ all-wheel drive
system is generally considered to be inferior to full-time
four-wheel drive
alternator
A device which is attached to a car’s engine and produces
the electricity to charge the battery as well as running
the lights etc. Technically speaking, an alternator is a
generator which produces alternating current, as opposed
to the dynamo generators on older cars, which produced
direct-current. The chief advantage of an alternator is that
it is highly efficient. See also generator.
amperes (amps)
Technically speaking, an ampere is unit of electrical current
produced by 1 volt acting through 1 ohm of resistance.
If it helps, think of electrical current as something that
flows through a pipe like water. The voltage is the water
pressure, the size of the pipe is the degree of resistance
(measured in ohms), and the amount of flow through
the pipe is your current, measured in amps.
amp/hour
Amp/hour is short for Amperes times Hour. Amp/hour
is a measure which tells a technician how much electricity
is produced or used. The measurement is obtained by
multiplying the current in amps by the hours for which
it flows. Fully charged and new, a 50Ah battery should
deliver one ampere for 50 hours or two for 25 hours and
so on. A typical car battery can produce 25-90 amp/hours.
See also amperes. See also battery
analogue instrument
Analogue instruments (eg, a speedometer) generally show
movement by a moving needle which points at markers
around the dial. A traditional clock with hands is an
analogue instrument. Digital instruments, by comparison,
generally show you only the numbers without any moving
needle. Please note that ‘analogue’ or ‘digital’ in this case
refers to the way you view the instruments, not how they
work inside - many modern cars have electronic instruments, even if they use an analogue display.
anchor/s
1) A mounting point on the vehicle for such things as
seatbelts. Obviously, the anchor point has to be strong
enough to hold the seatbelt in an accident.
2) A slang term for brakes. Eg, “I jumped on the anchors
just in time”.
anti-dive suspension
When you slam your foot on the brakes the car tends
to dip or dive towards the road. This can cause a loss of
control, so anti-dive suspension systems resist the urge to
dip under braking, and are therefore less likely to cause
you to lose control of the vehicle.
anti-foaming agent
Engines use oil to make the inside parts slippery. Without
this slipperiness, the engine would disintegrate within a
few seconds. However, when the engine is operating, the
engine’s internal parts tend to churn the oil around, and as
the oil gets churned around it tends to foam, just as soap
does in a washing machine. This is bad, because foamed
oil does not work as well as it should and in fact is quite
abrasive. For this reason, oil companies put an additive
into the oil to stop it foaming.
antifreeze
A liquid which stops the water in your car’s radiator and
engine from freezing when the outside temperature drops
below zero. This is important, because water expands
as it freezes, and this expansion can wreck the engine.
Antifreezes also usually make the water in the radiator
boil at a higher temperature, meaning that your car will
be less likely to boil over when the engine gets very hot
if you use antifreeze. Antifreezes usually also contain a
corrosion inhibitor, which helps stop rust and other
forms of corrosion from eating away at the insides of
your car’s engine. For this reason antifreeze should be 
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
added to most cars, regardless of whether they will be
driven very hot or parked in cold places. Most brands of
antifreeze are based around the chemical ethylene glycol.
See also our article ‘Keeping it Cool’ in the ‘General
Comments’ section.
anti-knock additive
Anti-knock additives are chemicals such as lead which
raise the fuel’s octane, and therefore make it less prone to
knocking. See also knocking & octane.
anti-knock Dictionary
see octane
anti-roll bar
A part of a car’s suspension that helps stop body roll,
that is, the tendency for a vehicle to lean over during
cornering. An anti-roll bar should not be confused with
an anti-sway bar.
anti-skid braking (also called ABS or ALB)
A braking system that uses sensors to detect when a wheel
is about to lock up (and therefore skid) during braking.
The brake controller then lets the brakes off on that wheel
just enough to keep it turning. The advantages of anti-skid
braking are that 1) dangerous skids are avoided and 2) the
car can still be steered while braking heavily.
anti-squat suspension
A suspension setup which helps stop the back of a car
suddenly dropping during acceleration.
anti-sway bar
A part of a car’s suspension that helps stop the vehicle
swaying from side to side as it drives. Not to be confused
with anti-roll bar.
anti-submarining device
Basically a steel ramp or tube built into a car’s seat frame
which helps stop you slipping underneath the seatbelt
during an accident.
AWD
see All-Wheel Drive
axle
A metal shaft that carries the wheels. A live axle is one that
actually takes the power of the engine and passes it to the
wheel to push the car along the road. A dead/independent
axle just supports the wheel.
backfire
A small explosion in the exhaust or intake system caused
by unburnt fuel being ignited at the wrong time.
badge engineering
Producing the same product under different names. For
example, the early Ford Lasers & the Mazda 323s are
essentially the same car with different badges.
Baja
Pronounced Baha, Baja means ‘lower’ in Spanish. The
term refers to the Mexican Baja California peninsular, the
site of many of the world’s toughest offroad races. In New
Zealand the term Baja is mainly applied to modified VW
Beetles which imitate an offroad design developed in the
late 1960s by Drino Miller.
balance shaft
Some engines vibrate too much when they are tested at
the factory, so the manufacturers add an extra shaft, which
often looks a bit like 300mm of mangled steel broomstick.
As the engine spins, this extra shaft spins inside. Because
this precision-made shaft has carefully placed weights
around it, it counteracts the engine’s vibrations and
therefore makes the engine run smoother.
ball joint
A part of a car’s suspension or steering that works exactly
like your knee joint.
ball and nut steering
See steering box.
barrel
1) A container to store beer or wine.
2) A cylinder.
base coat/clear coat system
Most modern cars use a base coat/clear coat system. First,
the base coat (which contains the colour but no gloss) is
sprayed on, then a clear coat (which contains gloss but
no colour) is sprayed over the top to give protection and
gloss to the colour underneath.
battery
A device for producing and/or storing electrical energy.
See our article ‘Know your Battery’ in the ‘General
Comments’ section.
bell housing
A bell-shaped piece of metal attached to the front of
the gearbox which fits around the clutch or torque
converter .
belt
Think of the belt you wear around your waist. Now think
of it as being permanently joined in the middle, and you
have a reasonable picture of the sort of belt used commonly on your car’s engine, except that car belts are usually
made of stronger materials. These belts work like the chain
on a bicycle and are often made of synthetic rubber or
nylon. See also fan belt. See also timing belt.
belt tensioner
See timing belt tensioner
benzene
A highly inflammable liquid which helps make up
petrol. It is highly toxic. Benzene has the chemical
formula of C6
H6
bhp
see brake horsepower
block
see engine block
blow
1) To destroy or damage an engine or gearbox, especially
after they have been strained by hard driving.
2) To supercharge or turbocharge an engine.
blower
A supercharger or turbocharger
body computer
A computer that coordinates the various functions of a car.
The big advantage of such a system is that it enables different parts of the car to respond to changes in a coordinated
way. For example, on some cars the windscreen wipers
speed up as the car goes faster. See also ECU
bog
Motor industry slang for automotive body filler. See
also filler.
bonding
A fancy word for gluing, joining or welding two or more
different things.
boot
1) A flexible cover, often rubber or similar, which protects
grease or oil-covered moving parts underneath from
contamination such as dust.
2) British term for the rear compartment of a saloon
car.
bore
1) The tubelike space in an engine or brake cylinder in
which the piston moves backwards & forwards.
2) To rebore a motor.
3) A tedious person, especially one who spends hours
trying to impress others with his technical knowledge
and accuracy.
boxer
1) A person who punches other people for sport or
pleasure
2) A horizontally opposed engine. See also horizontallyopposed engine
3) (with a capital B) A Ferrari model with a 12 cylinder
boxer motor.
brake
A device that stops something, especially a car. See also
brake horsepower.
brake booster
A device, usually powered by air vacuum from the engine,
which makes the brakes much more effective.
brake cylinder
A tube through which a piston is pushed to operate a
car’s hydraulic brakes.
brake disc
Also known as a rotor, the brake disc is a heavy metal
disk which revolves with the wheel of a car. See also
disc brakes.
brake drum
A heavy metal drum, shaped a bit like a round cake tin.
See also drum brakes.
brake fade
The tendency for brakes to be less effective if used hard.
brake fluid
A special fluid which is used in car braking systems.
brake horsepower
A measure of how much power an engine puts out. The
system was developed during the Industrial Revolution when steam engines started displacing horses in
mines. In
order to work out how many horses each engine was
replacing, a device called a prony brake was developed.
The engine pulled against the brake and its power was
measured according to how many horses it had the power
of, hence the term brake horsepower.
brake pad
A flat metal disc covered in a softer material such as asbestos. When the brake pads are pushed against the brake
disc they help stop the car. Because the pad is softer than
the disc, they wear out quicker than the disc.
B-Pillar
The metal tube that runs from the roof to the floor of a
four-door car, between the front and the back doors.
brake shoe
A half-round piece of steel which lives inside the brake
drum. The top of the shoe is covered with a softer material
such as asbestos. When the brake shoes are pushed against
the brake drum they slow the brake drum, therefore the
wheel, therefore the car. See also drum brakes.
breaker points
See contact points
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
bulletproof
Damned near indestructible.
bulkhead
The British term for firewall
burn out
To burn or wear away a car component. For example, if
you carry too heavy a load up a steep hill you can burn
out the clutch plate.
burnout
Deliberately spinning the back wheels of a car in order
to create lots of smoke & noise. Although a burnout
is similar to a wheelie, there is a difference - a person
dropping a wheelie is usually trying to accelerate away
with lots of smoke and noise. A person doing a burnout
may not move the vehicle very far at all - his or her main
purpose is to make the back tyres spin for effect. See also
donut. See also wheelie.
butane
A gas used as an alternative fuel to petrol. Both butane and
propane are forms of liquefied petroleum gas. (LPG)
camber
1) The curvature of the road surface.
2) The inward or outward tilt of the wheels of a vehicle,
as viewed from the front. If the wheels tilt in at the top,
they have a negative camber, if they tilt out the camber
is described as being positive.
camshaft
Part of a car’s engine, namely a metal shaft with carefully
machined lumps around it called lobes. As the camshaft is
revolved, the lobes push directly or indirectly down on the
valves to open them, then as the shaft continues around,
the lobes move away from the valves, allowing them to
close again. See also engine valve.
carbon fibre
A very strong synthetic fibre used to make lightweight
yet high strength components. It is used in the Britten
superbike and frequently in racing cars.
carbon monoxide
An odourless, colourless & extremely poisonous gas
produced where carbon-based fuels such as petrol are not
burned completely during combustion.
carburettor
A device which mixes fuel and air together and feeds this
mixture into the engine. See also fuel injection.
caster
The vertical alignment of the steered wheel (usually the
front wheel), when viewed from the side. This not as complicated as it sounds. Think of a bicycle. When viewed
from the side the front forks (and therefore the front
wheel) are not straight-up-&-down – they stick out at
an angle. Because they stick out towards the front on
most bicycles, this is called positive caster. If the wheel
stuck out towards the back, it would be termed negative
caster. See also camber. See also toe in/toe out. See also
wheel alignment
catalytic converter
An anti-pollution device which theoretically helps purify
a car’s exhaust gases by changing them into less toxic
substances as they leave the engine. It is mounted in a
tube fitted into the exhaust system. As the exhaust gases
pass through the converter, which contains a mesh of
such noble metals as palladium and platinum, unburned
hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide are theoretically
converted to water vapour, carbon dioxide and other less
toxic gases. The catch is, catalytic converters don’t work
properly unless the engine is hot, and wear out long before
the rest of the vehicle (they are often not replaced).
cc
Short for cubic centimetres, the cc rating of an engine
is a measure of how much it will hold, eg, a 1.5 litre
engine has a cubic capacity of 1500, or to put it another
way, 1500cc. Often, engine capacities are rounded up to
the next major figure for the purposes of simplicity. For
example, an engine might be described in a brochure as
being a 1500, even though it is actually 1498cc. See also
cubic-inch displacement.
Cd
Coefficient of Drag. See aerodynamics
chain drive
A drive system consisting of toothed sprockets linked
by a chain. A bicycle uses chain drive. See also timing
chain.
chassis
The chassis (rhymes with lassie) is a frame underneath
a car which provides much of its strength. The engine,
gearbox and suspension are usually bolted to the chassis.
On older cars the chassis was a separate part to which the
car’s body was bolted or welded, but on modern cars it is
manufactured as part of the car’s body. When people talk
about a full chassis, they are usually referring to a chassis
which runs the entire length of the vehicle, as opposed
to a modern car, which has a chassis front and back, but
in the middle uses the body itself for strength. See also
monocoque construction
clear coat
The top coat of a paint job, designed to produce maximum shine. See also base coat
climate control
A fancy term for air conditioning. It is usually applied to
systems where the air can be programmed to remain at a
set temperature, as opposed to the older systems which
simply threw hot or cold air at you.
clock/clocked
A car which has had its odometer reading altered to hide
its true mileage is said to have been clocked. The verb is
clock. See also odometer
clutch
A device activated by the clutch pedal that temporarily
and gradually disconnects the connection between the
engine and gearbox in order to let you change gear and
also to smoothly move the car from stationary. See also
torque converter.
CNG
See compressed natural gas
cog
A toothed wheel. The evenly-spaced teeth lock into something such as another cog or a chain and are used to drive
something or be driven by something. A bicycle uses a cog
mounted between the pedals to drive a chain, and another
cog driven by this chain to power the back wheel.
coil
An electrical device which converts the low voltage coming from the car battery into many thousands of volts
in order to power the spark plugs. The coil is triggered
by either the contact points or by an electronic ignition.
See also contact points. See also electronic ignition. See
also spark plugs.
computer torque control
see torque control
compressed natural gas (CNG)
Methane mixed with small quantities of C02 , used to
power engines.
concours
Short for concours d’elegance, a French term meaning
‘contest of elegance’. In modern English concours means
a display of, and often a contest between, fine cars. Although such a display will often be of luxury cars, the term
concours is also applied to the quality of any classic car
restoration, eg, a very well restored classic car is described
as being of concours quality, meaning that it could win a
contest for the quality of its restoration.
contact points
A switch that turns the engine’s coil on and off at the
appropriate time in order to fire the spark plugs, and
therefore the fuel. The contact points live and work inside
the distributor in older cars. Now replaced by electronic
ignitions. See also coil. See also distributor. See also
electronic ignition. See also spark plug.
constant velocity joint
A type of universal joint used primarily in front-wheel
drive cars. Unlike the universal joints used on older-type
driveshafts, the constant velocity joint means that both
halves of the joint constantly spin at the same speed.
Conventional universal joints momentarily speed up and
slow down as they revolve, which causes them to vibrate
and wear out quickly when used on very short shafts, such
as the ones on front wheel drive cars. See also driveshaft.
See also half shaft.
C-pillar
The roof support behind the rear door in a four-door
car.
cruise control
A system which allows the driver to set his or her cruising
speed. This speed is maintained automatically, regardless
of such things as uphill or downhill slopes.
cubic-inch displacement
Sometimes abbreviated as CI or CID, an imperial, as opposed to metric, method of measuring engine capacity. For
example, a Triumph 2.5 engine has a capacity of 152
cubic inches and a cc rating of 2498cc. See also cc.
cv joint
See constant velocity joint
cylinder head
The removable top of a car’s engine. In almost all modern
designs the engine valves and also usually the camshaft
operate as part of the cylinder head. Because the job of
the cylinder head is to seal in the explosions that power
an engine, it must be a tight fit. See also camshaft. See
also engine valves.
cylinder head gasket
In between the cylinder head and the engine block is a
cylinder head gasket, a flat piece of flameproof material
which acts as a seal. If this gasket leaks, bad engine problems, notably overheating, are likely to occur. Sometimes
the gasket leaks so badly that the gasket is burnt away. This
is called a blown head gasket.
diesel engine
Named after Rudolph Diesel, the man who invented it,
the diesel engine works by compressing diesel fuel until it
explodes. Actually, to be strictly accurate, the diesel engine
works by squirting diesel fuel into highly compressed air
inside a cylinder. Whereas a petrol engine requires a spark
from a spark plug to ignite the fuel, the diesel engine fires
its fuel through having the cylinder very hot before the fuel
is injected in. The cylinder is made hot, believe it or not,
by nothing more than compressed air: when air is heavily
compressed, a great deal of heat is created in the process. 
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
The faster it’s compressed, the more heat is generated. The
diesel engine, therefore, sucks in air, compresses it, which
raises the temperature of the cylinder, then diesel fuel is
sprayed into that cylinder through a tiny nozzle called a jet,
which works like a syringe needle. Because the compressed
air in the cylinder is very hot, this causes the fine mist of
diesel fuel to explode, which drives the piston downwards
and powers the engine. Traditional diesels are slow and
smoky, but their efficiency can be increased dramatically
by fitting them with a turbocharger, an air pump that
forces more air through the engine and therefore allows
more fuel to be injected. Because they work at extremely
high pressures, diesel engines have to be built very solidly
in order to go the distance, but when properly built,
some diesels have offered incredible reliability (generally
the larger ones, not the smaller ones). Certain older conventional diesel engines, such as the ones fitted to Toyota
Land Cruisers and Nissan Patrols, could be relied upon
for half a million kilometres or more with nothing but
the most basic maintenance. This reliability was mainly
because those engines were, like all conventional diesels,
rather inefficient – on a conventional diesel vehicle, you
need a motor roughly twice the size of the equivalent petrol
engine in order to produce the same amount of power,
and even then you won’t get anything like the same acceleration. In other words, a three litre conventional diesel
puts out about the same power as 1.5 litre petrol engine,
but won’t get up to speed as fast. However, with modern
common rail technology, a diesel engine can be made to
run with similar efficiency to a petrol engine. First, the
diesel fuel is pumped into and stored at extremely high
pressures in a single long tank called a rail. Because all
the cylinders share a common rail, this type of diesel is
called a common rail. Attached to this common rail are
a series of special valves that carefully control the injection
of fuel going into their particular cylinder. Because the
timing and amount of fuel are both carefully controlled, and because the high pressure allows an extremely
fine mist to be injected into each cylinder, common
rail diesels operate far more efficiently and cleanly than
convention diesel engines. The downside, which is only
just beginning to show, is in the area of longevity. Older
diesel engines chug along at low revs for years and years.
They’re not reliable because they’re diesels, they’re reliable
because they are very solidly built and they don’t work
hard. However, when you make any diesel motor (which
is already highly stressed) perform like a petrol engine, you
dramatically increase the strain on the engine components.
This, in our opinion, raises a big question mark over the
future reliability of modern diesels. Also, the extremely
high pressures required to operate the system mean that
even minor leaks are a serious problem, and pumps are
likely to wear out much sooner than on older versions.
And last but not least, making a diesel work as hard as a
petrol engine means that it will use far more fuel than its
less efficient ancestors. Diesels will always have the edge
on fuel economy, but the gap is no longer as dramatic as
it was a generation ago, when many diesel powered cars
would give twice the mileage for half the price of petrol.
See also turbocharger.
differential
A gearing system which allows the two powered wheels on
the opposite sides of a car to move at different speeds as the
car goes round corners. See also limited-slip
differential. See also transaxle.
DIN
Deutsche Institut fur Normung - the German Institute
for Standardisation, an organisation which sets internationally-recognised standards for measurement.
direct ignition system
An ignition system used on some modern cars which use
no distributor. Instead, electrical impulses are sent from
a device called a modulator direct to the spark plugs. See
also coil. See also contact points. See also distributor. See
also electronic ignition. See also ignition lead. See also
rotor. See also spark plug. See also timing.
direct injection
See fuel injection.
directional tyre
A tyre which is designed to rotate in one direction only.
disc/disk brakes
A braking system used on most modern cars. When you
put your foot on the brakes the brake pads are pushed
hard against the disk by the brake cylinder, which slows
the disk and therefore the car. It’s actually a very similar
system to the one used on most bicycles. Because disc
brakes tend to stop more evenly, they are often used on
the front of cars, with drum brakes on the back. See also
drum brakes.
distributor
1) A device, powered by the engine that does two separate
jobs. Firstly, it houses and operates the contact points
or the electronic ignition switching unit (see separate
explanations for these). Having switched on the coil, it
collects the coil’s powerful pulse through the ignition lead
and distributes this pulse to the appropriate cylinder in
order to fire the fuel at exactly the right moment. This
right moment, naturally enough, is known as the correct
timing. See also coil. See also contact points. See also
distributor cap. See also electronic ignition. See also
ignition lead. See also rotor. See also spark plug. See
also timing.
2) A device which distributes the fuel to the injectors in a
fuel injection system. See also fuel injection.
distributor cap
A plastic cap, shaped rather like the top to an aerosol,
which sits on top of the distributor and collects the voltages to pass to the spark plugs. The ends of the ignition
leads are usually plugged into the distributor cap and are
electrified by sparks leaping off the rotor. See also coil. See
also contact points. See also distributor. See also electronic
ignition. See also ignition lead. See also rotor. See also
spark plug. See also timing.
DOHC
Double overhead camshafts. See also camshaft.
dog
1) A poorly performing or unreliable car. See also
lemon.
2) A pin or stub used to mate & drive a gear or assembly.
donut
A controlled drift of a car in which the car is spun 360°
while the tyres are spinning. It’s done to show off. See also
burnout. See also wheelie.
DOT
The American Department of Transportation. DOT
standards for such things as brake fluid are often internationally-recognised.
double-declutch
The double-declutch technique is much easier to do
than to describe. It was once part of every young driver’s
instruction, because before World War II and for quite
a while after, carmakers couldn’t or wouldn’t stop cars
crunching between gears on manual gearboxes when
driving. The problem is caused by the fact that the gear
you want to change into (say, third gear) is spinning at a
different speed than the gear you are in, so the spinning
gears collide and graunch before they lock together. If it
makes it easier for you to visualise, think of two people
trying to move through the same doorway when the
one in front is going much slower than the one behind
– either you speed one up or slow one down, because if
you don’t a confrontation is inevitable.
The purpose of the double-declutch is to make
the two gears move at approximately the same speed
so that they merge smoothly like the two halves of a
zipper.
To double-declutch when changing up (that
is, first to second, second to third etc), you simply
momentarily take the car out of gear and into neutral.
You then put the gearbox into the next gear.
When changing down (fourth to third, third to
second, etc) you simply momentarily take the car out
of gear and into neutral, then you give the accelerator a
quick pump, then put the gearstick into the next gear.
That’s it. With a bit of practice you can usually
change gears nearly as smoothly as you would with a
modern car.
The main reason for mastering the doubledeclutch is so that you can drive a modern car
which has a gearbox suffering from dysfunctional
synchromesh (look up synchromesh if you don’t
understand). On some high mileage modern cars the
gearbox starts crunching between gears, even though
it may otherwise work okay. The double-declutch
should get you through everyday gearchanges without
problem.
You probably don’t need to be told this, but
on almost every vehicle on the planet with a manual
gearbox, you must come to a complete halt before
changing from forward into reverse.
It’s also worth noting that on some classic cars,
first gear was meant to be engaged only if the car was
absolutely stopped, and you should never attempt to
double-declutch into first gear on one of these vehicles,
because if you get it wrong you may wreck an otherwise
perfectly good gearbox.
Mastering the above should get you through.
For those who like challenging experiences, it’s worth
mastering the heel-and-toe changedown, which is
useful for when you are braking and changing down at
the same time. The left foot operates the clutch as usual,
while the right foot is turned sideways and operates
the brake with the ball of the foot while the accelerator
is worked with the heel. This technique takes a bit of
practice and until mastery is achieved should never be
attempted in the presence of other motorists. It’s best
to practice the heeling-and-toeing of the brake and
accelerator pedals on a flat driveway with the handbrake
on and no kids around. Don’t actually try and change
gears at this point, just get the hang of operating
the brake and accelerator with one foot. If you can’t
achieve reasonable skill at this, don’t proceed with this
technique on the road. When heeling-and-toeing of
the brake and accelerator is mastered, you can practise
the heel-and-toe double-declutch on an empty road
in clear conditions. Don’t attempt the heel-and-toe
double-declutch in ordinary road conditions unless
a reasonable degree of mastery has been achieved.
However, most people can perform this technique with
great skill after a bit of practice – some rally drivers use
it on every race, in order to change down quicker and
with a minimum wastage of power. The purpose of the
heel-and-toe changedown, however, should never be to
turn you into a rally driver; the point of the exercise is
to enable you to change down a gear as you slow down
on a corner. Aside from convenience and comfort, it’s
likely to offer greater safety under difficult conditions
such as in the wet. But, in case you haven’t taken the
hint already, if you’re not good at it, don’t try it on
public roads at all!
double overhead camshafts
Two camshafts mounted over the top of the engine. See
also camshaft.
double wishbone suspension
A suspension system which uses two wishbones. See
also wishbone.
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
drive-by-wire
See electronic throttle control
driveshaft
A metal shaft, usually hollow, that transmits the power
from the gearbox to the differential in a front engined,
rear-wheel drive car. One or both ends of the driveshaft
are fitted with universal joints. See also constant velocity
joint. See also half shaft. See also universal joint.
drive train
Everything (except the engine itself) that takes the power
of the engine and delivers it to the road surface. This
includes, transmission, clutch or torque converter, differential, axles, wheels & tyres etc. See also power train.
drive wheels
See powered wheels
driven wheels
See powered wheels
drum brakes
Drum brakes use a heavy metal drum, shaped a bit like
a round cake tin, and this drum lives at the back of the
car’s wheel. When the car’s wheels go round, the brake
drum goes round too. The brake shoes live inside the
drum, and when you put your foot on the brakes the
shoes are pushed hard against the drum by the brake
cylinder, which slows the drum and therefore the car.
See also brake shoes.
dwell
1) The amount of time that the contact points stay closed
before opening each time.
See also contact points.
2) The amount of time an engine valve stays closed during
operation. See also engine valve. See also camshaft.
dynamo
A direct-current generator. See also alternator.
dyno, dynamometer
A device used to measure the power and speed of an
engine. Sometimes called a rolling road, because to use
most dynanometers you drive the car onto a series of rollers
that simulate a car driving down the road.
east-west
An engine mounted sideways, that is with the front of
the engine facing one front wheel and the back facing the
other. Also known as a transverse mounting, this style of
engine is used in most, but not all, front-wheel drive cars.
See also front-wheel drive.
ECM / ECU
see Electronic Control Unit.
EFI
see fuel injection
electronic control unit (ECU)
The electronic control unit, more commonly known
as the ECU, controls the basic engine functions such
as the fuel injection system, ignition timing & idle speed
control. It may be also called the engine management
computer or electronic control module, and several
other names that mean much the same thing. While
they are working as God intended, ECUs generally offer
very efficient operation because they usefully coordinate
the engine’s various functions. That’s when they are
working. Many manufacturers, including Mitsubishi,
completely underestimated how rugged electronics had
to be before you could put them inside a vehicle’s engine
bay. As a result, the typical life of an ECU from 1989-94
was as little as three to five years (the exception is Toyota).
Some tired ECUs will just cause irritating problems like
having the Check Engine light coming on, or idling
problems. When ECUs get bad they may cause complete
breakdowns, especially when the engine is hot. In case
you don’t know it, heat is very bad for computers, and
life in the engine bay is very hot, so the computers cook,
which is why they often give problems when the car has
been running for a while. Honda and a few others came
up with the bright idea of installing the ECU under the
seats or somewhere else on the floor, which eliminated
heat problems but introduced terrible problems caused by
moisture. None of these problems had to happen. ECU
problems on Toyotas are rare simply because Toyota builds
their computers properly in the first place. The worst cars
for computer problems are anything from Europe, Korea
or America. With the exception of late 1980s to mid 1990s
Hondas and Mitsubishis, Jap cars tend to have much more
reliable ECUs. ECU problems tend to be very expensive
to both diagnose and fix, so it’s important that you never
buy a vehicle that has a Check Engine light showing.
See also body computer. See also electronic ignition.
See also fuel injection.
electronic ignition
As the name suggests, a system of firing a car’s fuel where
the contact points are replaced with a (usually) more
efficient electronic system. The big advantage of most
electronic ignitions is that they are extremely reliable and
rarely, if ever, need adjusting. See also contact points.
electronically controlled suspension
A suspension system where a computer controls the
shock absorbers and sometimes the springs, in response
to road conditions.
electronic stability control
Electronic stability control uses sensors to detect
when a vehicle is straying from the intended direction of the driver. Sophisticated electronics then take
over the brakes and engine to bring the vehicle back
under control. See also our article on electronic stability
control in the ‘Safety’ section.
electronic throttle control
On most cars built before the late 1990s, the accelerator
pedal and the engine were linked by a piece of steel string
called a bowden cable; when the driver pushed the pedal,
the throttle was moved by this cable. On cars with electronic throttle control the bowden cable is gone; replaced
by a electronic sensor called the accelerator pedal position
sensor, linked to the accelerator pedal. This sensor records
the movement of the pedal and relays this information
to the engine control computer. Aside from being clever,
the chief advantage of this system is that it makes it easier
for car designers to develop safety systems like electronic
stability control, because such systems need to take over
the accelerator in an emergency. Electronic throttle
control has little effect on things like fuel consumption
or performance.
See also electronic stability control.
engine
A device with moving parts that converts power into
movement.
engine block
A large block of moulded metal containing the cylinders
of an internal combustion engine
engine valve
Basically, an engine valve is a tap which lets fuel & air
into an engine or lets the burnt fuel out after the engine
is finished with it.
fan belt
Originally used to drive the cooling fan on a car’s engine,
the so-called fan belt is now used to power the water
pump, and sometimes several other devices on a modern
engine such as the alternator & the air conditioning
pump. In many cases the ‘fan belt’ does not operate the
fan at all because most modern cars have electric fans.
See also belt.
filler
One of a range of products designed to fill dents and
sometimes cover rust holes on cars. Almost all are based
around styrene resin. The trade slang for most fillers is bog,
loosely meaning shit, because fillers were traditionally used
to cover up badly repaired panels or unrepaired rust holes.
The derogatory term still used for a bad panelbeater is ‘bog
artist’. This prejudice against ‘bog’ dates from the days
when cars were ‘properly’ repaired with lead, a toxic substance so heavy that only the smallest amount was applied
to a panel, and even then only after the panel was expertly
beaten back into shape after an accident. People who were
incapable of, or too lazy to, repair panels properly used the
then-new fillers to cover bad workmanship. Times have
changed, and the panels on modern cars are no longer
beaten back to shape because they are too thin to repair
properly - panels are simply replaced. Modern body fillers
are also much lighter and more stable than their distant
ancestors of the 1950s and come in a variety of different
types. In recent years sophisticated and extremely strong,
carbon fibre-based fillers such as Newtech (a brand name)
have given fillers a certain respectability. There is nothing
noble about using lead to repair a car (it’s hard to work
with and a deadly poison). Products like Newtech can
be regarded as a semi-permanent repair in its place. See
also carbon fibre.
firewall
A wall, usually of steel, which separates the engine compartment from the passenger compartment of a car.
4OHC
Four overhead camshafts. See quad overhead camshafts.
floorpan
Basically, everything below a car’s doors.
four-wheel independent suspension
A suspension system which allows all four wheels to
travel up and down independent of one another. This
means that one wheel can go over a bump without affecting the others.
freeflow exhaust
An exhaust system, especially one that replaces the
standard exhaust manifold, which is designed to provide
the minimum resistance to exhaust gases. Because more
gas can flow out of the engine, more fuel can be fed in,
therefore a car with a freeflow exhaust can theoretically go
faster. In order to achieve maximum gas flow, designers
of these systems will often go to extraordinary lengths
to incorporate long, flowing curves into the pipes. The
result often looks quite beautiful. Freeflow exhausts are
often used in racing engines or by people who like to
think of themselves as racers. See also headers. See also
manifold.
fuel injection
A system for spraying carefully measured amounts of
fuel into a car’s engine in order to make it run efficiently.
Fuel injection systems have made carburettors obsolete
on most modern cars. In older fuel injection systems the
fuel was sprayed into the manifold. In direct injection
systems, the fuel is spayed directly into the cylinder just
before ignition. Direct injection systems are much more
efficient. Because most modern fuel injection systems are
electronically controlled they are therefore called electronic
fuel injection systems (EFI). See also carburettor. See also
manifold. See also multi-point fuel injection.
gas-filled shock absorber
A shock absorber which uses pressurised gas to assist in
its action. 
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
gasket
A piece of thin, compressible material, often flat, used
to stop leakage between two surfaces. See also cylinder
head gasket.
gearbox
Also known as transmission, the gearbox takes the power
from the engine and uses a series of gears to give a car more
power and less speed, or less power and more speed. The
term transmission for a gearbox is okay, but is generally
used with the word automatic to describe an automatic
transmission. For a manual gearbox (one where you have
to change the gears by hand as you drive along), the term
gearbox is probably the preferred term. See also clutch.
See also synchromesh. See also torque converter.
generator
In the usual way of speaking, a generator (as opposed to
an alternator) is an older style producer of electricity for
cars. Although mounted to the motor in a similar way
to the more modern alternators, generators generally
take longer to charge a battery, which is why they are
usually found only on cars over 20 years old. Technically
speaking, however, a car generator is actually any device
which produces electricity by converting rotation into
electrical energy. The device most mechanics describe as
a generator is (technically speaking) actually a dynamo,
or direct-current generator. See also alternator.
headers
Basically the same as a freeflow exhaust manifold, headers
are often made with all pipes of equal length in order to
achieve equal gas flow. See also freeflow exhaust.
half shafts
The individual axle shafts that pass the power from either
side of the differential to the wheels.
hardtop
Some versions of sports cars and offroaders have no permanent roof, and instead come with a removable flexible
cover called a softtop. They frequently leak. The versions of
these vehicles that have a permanent, non-removable roof
are sometimes called hardtops to distinguish them from
their open-topped siblings. However, some sports cars and
offroaders with no permanent roof come with the option
of a more practical removable top that is made of a stiff
material such as hard plastic or fibreglass. These are called
convertible hardtops or removable hardtops.
head
See cylinder head.
head gasket
See cylinder head gasket.
hood
American term for bonnet
horizontally-opposed engine
An engine where the cylinders stick out sideways in
opposite directions, such as in the Volkswagen Beetle
or most Subarus.
hub
The centre of a wheel. On a car, the hub is a round piece
of metal to which the road wheels are bolted.
ignition lead
(On most cars) A thick wire which passes the high voltages from the coil, first to the distributor, then from the
distributor to the spark plugs. Also called an HT (high
tension) lead. See also coil. See also contact points. See
also distributor. See also electronic ignition. See also
rotor. See also spark plug. See also timing.
ignition points
See contact points
ignition system
The part of a car which creates and distributes the electrical
energy required to fire the engine’s fuel.
independent rear suspension
A suspension system which allows both back wheels to
travel up and down independent of one another. This
means that one wheel can go over a bump without affecting the other.
intercooler
A radiator-like device which cools the hot air (and sometimes the air/fuel mixture) after it is driven through a
turbocharger and before it enters the car’s engine. Cooling
the air increases the amount of air that can be pumped
into the engine. How? Because the hotter the air is, the
more that the air expands. Cooler air is far more dense,
therefore much more air can be forced into the same
engine. Increasing the amount of air flowing through the
motor can increase the efficiency dramatically because as
more air is forced in, more fuel can be usefully added.
Also, because the air is cooled before it goes in, the cooler
air tends to cool the insides of the motor and therefore
smooth out the explosions that power it. The reason that
the constant explosions inside an engine don’t simply
blow it apart are because the explosions are regular and
controlled. If the explosions become erratic, this is known
as knocking, and that’s exactly what happens inside the
engine - the parts knock around, although you will not
always hear it. Mild knocking inside an engine is also
known as pinging or pinking. Cooler air is also far
kinder to the cylinder heads, which are prone to cracking,
warping and blowing gaskets if abused, and engine valves,
which will simply burn away if they get too hot for too
long. See also turbocharger.
Kevlar (a trademark)
A lightweight, strong and extremely expensive plastic
used in such things as racing cars which must be both
strong and light.
knocking - Petrol & diesel-powered cars work by
exploding the fuel inside the engine. The reason that
the constant explosions inside an engine don’t simply
blow it apart are because the explosions are regular and
controlled. If the explosions become erratic, this is known
as knocking, and that’s exactly what happens inside the
engine - the parts knock around, although you will not
always hear it. Mild knocking inside an engine is also
known as pinging or pinking. See also octane.
lemon
A badly designed and/or assembled vehicle, especially a
new one. A model of car is often labelled a lemon by the
public when owners keep having problems with it from
new. By comparison, a dog is a vehicle of any age which
may be badly designed and/or assembled or it may simply
be worn out. See also dog.
limited-slip differential (LSD)
Most differentials will allow one wheel to spin freely
on slippery surfaces , which means a loss of power and
control. Limited-slip differentials limit this slippage,
therefore giving better control of the vehicle. See also
differential.
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
Gases, predominantly propane and butane, which are
present underground along with crude oil and which
are often burnt in car engines as a substitute for petrol.
Although these substances are naturally gases, they
turn to liquids when compressed. See also compressed
natural gas.
life, meaning of
“Ultimately, one cannot justify life and find meaning in
it by intellectual analysis and the use of logic. One must
reach a state in which he or she experiences emotionally
and biologically that it is worthwhile to be alive and feels
active excitement about the fact of existence. Agonizing
philosophical preoccupation with the problem of the
meaning of life, instead of being a legitimate philosophical issue, should be seen as a symptom indicating that
the dynamic flow of the life process had been obstructed
and blocked... A person who is actively engaged in the life
process and experiences zest and joy will never question
whether life has any meaning. In this state, existence
appears to be precious and miraculous, and its value is
self evident.”
(Stanislav Groff, Beyond the Brain, 1982)
low profile tyres
Tyres which are lower in height than conventional tyres.
They are used to improve handling, or to make a car
look cool. They generally give a lousy ride and are more
susceptible to damage on bad roads.
LSD
see limited-slip differential
manifold
A series of metal tubes that guide the combustion gases
in and out of the engine. The inlet manifold guides the
air (and often fuel) into the engine, while the exhaust
manifold takes the burnt air and fuel mixture out. The
exhaust manifold is attached directly to the exhaust pipe.
Manifolds are usually carefully curved in order to allow
maximum gas flow. See also freeflow exhaust.
monocoque construction
A system of construction where the main structural body
parts of a car are produced as one unit from sheet metal in
order to save effort and weight. See also chassis.
MPI / MPFI
see multi-point fuel injection
multi-point fuel injection
A fuel injection system where the fuel is injected directly
in front of the inlet valve of each cylinder as opposed
to single-point fuel injection system where the fuel is
injected into the air intake of the manifold. Multi-point
fuel injection systems are generally far more efficient than
single point. See also fuel injection.
multi-link rear suspension
In conventional rear suspension systems the wheels tend to
tilt during cornering, which means that the driver has less
control of the vehicle. Multi-link rear suspension systems
use a series of arms or links to keep the rear wheels vertical
while the car is in motion. This system is more complicated but often gives better control when cornering. The
major disadvantage of this system is that the suspension
often wears out much more quickly and may begin giving
inferior handling and knocking noises as the vehicle goes
around corners. It is also easily upset by minor collisions
and will cost much more to fix than a conventional rear
suspension. See also suspension.
NVH (Noise, vibration & harshness)
An engineering term which has crept into car magazine
articles and sales brochures. Terms like ‘good NVH
characteristics’ are simply an attempt to dazzle you with
science. You could just as easily say “This car runs quietly
and smoothly.” It means the same thing.
octane
The measure of a fuel’s anti-knock quality. In other
words, the higher the octane rating, the superior the
anti-knock quality.
odometer
A device which measures the distance which as car has
travelled. Because the odometer is often mounted in the
same place as the speedometer, many people wrongly use
the term speedo, or speedometer, when the actually mean
odometer. See also speedometer.
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
OHC
see overhead camshaft
overhead camshaft
A camshaft mounted in the cylinder head of the engine.
See also camshaft.
oversteer
see understeer
passive rear-wheel steering
A rear wheel suspension system which allows the rear
wheels to follow the angle of the front wheels during
cornering. By comparison, active rear-wheel steering
systems are directly connected to the steering wheel and
are moved by it.
passive restraint
See active restraint
pillar
The folded steel post that holds up a vehicle’s roof and is
often used to support the doors. The A pillar is the one
immediately in front of the driver’s door, the B pillar is the
one immediately behind the driver’s door and the C pillar
is the one immediately behind the passenger’s door.
pinging
See knocking
pinking
See knocking
piston
A round, often hollow, piece of metal with a flat or curved
top. It moves backwards & forwards in a tube called a bore
in much the same way as the plunger in a syringe draws
in or pushes out liquid. Pistons are used in hydraulic
cylinders such as the ones in a car’s brakes. When the
brake pedal is pushed a piston forces brake fluid down
tubes towards the wheels. At the wheels, pistons inside the
brake cylinders are pushed by the pressurised brake fluid,
thereby pushing the brake shoes against the brake drum.
Inside most car engines the piston’s purpose is first to
draw in vaporised fuel. Having drawn in the fuel it then
compresses it by moving back up the bore and squashing
it into a small space. After the fuel is ignited, the resultant
explosion pushes the piston back down the bore. This
pushing action is harnessed to power the car. The piston
then goes back up the bore to push the exhaust gases left
behind from the explosion out of the engine and into the
exhaust pipe. The whole process then starts again as the
piston draws in the next lot of fuel. This process happens
many thousands of times for every kilometre you drive.
See also bore. See also engine valves. See also valves.
platform
A platform is basically a single basic vehicle – empty
of moving parts or outer ‘skin’ – that can be cheaply
modified into different vehicles sold under different
brands. Basing a number of vehicles around a single
platform makes economic sense for manufacturers
because of the high cost of designing a vehicle from
scratch.
points
See ignition points
post
1) Something that sticks up and (usually) has something
else attached to it.
2) A British term for pillar.
power steering.
A power steering system uses some external force to
assist the driver to turn the wheels. On older cars this
usually done with hydraulics, using a pump driven from
the engine by a fan belt. On many modern cars power
steering is achieved using electric motors. Electric power
steering is cheaper to build and has the advantage that
it is easy to make it speed-sensitive. On speed-sensitive
power steering systems the amount of assistance given
to the steering depends on the speed you are driving.
These systems were developed because early power steering systems were notoriously insensitive. You need a lot
of assistance to turn the wheel when parking; however,
when you are on the open road you could probably drive
without power steering at all. Hence, a speed-sensitive
system adjusts the amount of help it gives you, depending
on how fast you are going.
power train
Everything (including the engine itself) that takes the
power of the engine and delivers it to the road surface.
This includes, engine, transmission, clutch or torque
converter, differential, axles, wheels & tyres etc. See also
drive train.
powered wheels
Usually known as the drive wheels or driven wheels,
these are the wheels that push or pull a vehicle along,
as opposed to the ones that just spin around. Think
of a bicycle. One wheel is attached to the chain and as
you pedal the power of your feet is passed to that wheel.
Therefore, it is called the powered wheel, drive wheel
or driven wheel.
pretensioning seatbelts
See seatbelts
pulley
Basically, a pulley is a wheel around which a belt of some
kind moves. See also belt.
pyrotechnic seatbelts
See seatbelts
rack-and-pinion steering
A simple yet extremely effective steering system which
used to be mainly confined to Morris Minors and some
sports cars, but is now the most common form of steering control. A rack is basically a flat cog and a pinion is a
round cog at the bottom of the steering shaft that moves
the pinion left or right when the steering wheel is turned
in that direction. The advantages of rack-and-pinion
steering are that the steering is often extremely direct and
less prone to wander than with steering box systems. See
also power steering. See also steering box.
regenerative braking
Regenerative braking is a system used in electric or hybrid
vehicles so that the electric engine that powers the vehicle
is temporarily converted into a generator during braking.
This is easier than it sounds because a generator and an
electric motor are technologically very similar. When the
driver starts slowing down the wheels of the vehicle start
spinning the electric motor. This energy from the spinning
motor is then used to charge the batteries that power the
electric engine during acceleration.
regulator
A device that controls the flow of energy, gas or fluid.
rotor
1) Any mechanical device which rotates in operation.
2) In many cars, a rotating device which takes the coil voltage and passes it to the appropriate spark plugs through
the ignition leads.
3) The disc on a disc brake.
rotary engine
An engine which operates in a continual circular motion
as opposed to a piston engine, where the pistons must
continually change direction in order to operate.
QOHC
see quad overhead camshafts
quad overhead camshafts
Four camshafts mounted over the top of a V6, V8 or V12
engine. See also camshaft.
scuttle panel
The panel between the back of the bonnet and the
windscreen.
seatbelts
There’s a detailed article: ‘A Tragic Lack of Restraint’
on our website, dogandlemon.com. Click on any icon
on our website and then search for ‘restraint’. The full
address for the article is: http://dogandlemon.com/media/Safety%20PDF/A%20Tragic%20Lack%20of%2
0Restraint.pdf.
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
self-levelling suspension
An active suspension system designed to ensure that the
car is always at a uniform height & position in relation
to the road, regardless of road conditions. See also active
suspension.
shift control logic
A computerised system which works out the best time to
change gear on an automatic transmission. Some systems
can adapt to suit the driver’s own style.
shimmy
Wobble.
shock absorber
A car spring will bounce up and down like a yoyo if
you leave it unrestrained and your vehicle will bounce up
and down with it. Shock absorbers dampen the bounce
of the suspension springs. In addition to cushioning
the car from shocks caused by things like bumps in the
road, shock absorbers help control the tendency of the
car to sway or wander as it drives. See also gas-filled
shock absorber.
single overhead camshaft
A single camshaft mounted over the top of the engine, as
opposed to two or more. See also camshaft.
SIPS
Short for ‘Side Impact Protection System’, Volvo’s excellent
design to protect the car’s occupants when the car is hit
from the side. Similar systems are being fitted into many
popular cars worldwide.
softtop
See hardtop
SOHC
See single overhead camshaft
spark plug
A tube-shaped device, usually made of a ceramic with a
metal core, that is screwed into the engine’s cylinder head.
The spark plug is powered by the coil. When the coil’s
voltage is passed to the spark plug by the distributor, the
spark plug, naturally enough, sparks, which fires the fuel
inside the engine. See also contact points. See also coil.
See also distributor. See also piston.
speedometer
A device which measures how fast a car is going. See
also odometer.
speed-sensitive power steering
See power steering.
stability control
See electronic stability control.
steering box
A small gearbox mounted onto the bottom of the steering
column which takes the movement of the steering wheel
and passes it to the steering linkage and therefore moves
the wheels. Modern steering boxes tend to be used on
commercial vehicles only, because they can be stronger and
more durable than rack and pinon steering, which is most
commonly used on cars. Inside the older steering boxes is
simply a series of gears. Modern steering boxes tend to be
of the recirculating ball type, which is also an old fashioned
design, but one which has endured. A recirculating ball
steering box uses gears with wide spaces between them.
This space is filled with ball bearings that are constantly
recirculating around the box, hence the name. Because the
ball bearings are constantly recirculating, wear is spread
over a very large area and therefore the steering box parts
can last a long time. The problem with this type of steering
system is that it is slow and unresponsive compared to a
steering rack. Also, recirculating ball systems tend to have a
dead spot when the steering wheel is in the straight ahead
position and also tend to allow the vehicle to wander a bit
over the road. See also power steering, steering linkages.
See also rack-and-pinion steering.
steering linkages
The rods and arms that move the wheels.
See also steering box.
supercharger
A pump, usually driven by a belt or chain from the engine,
which forces air and fuel into an engine under pressure
and can therefore make an engine produce more power. A
supercharger is the same as a turbocharger except that they
are driven by different methods. See also turbocharger.
suspension
The system of parts (including shock absorbers and
springs) that operate between the car’s wheels and its body.
The car is suspended on these parts and their job is to cushion the body from shock and to allow the vehicle to travel
in a controllable manner. See also shock absorber.
synchromesh
On cars before World War II, the gearboxes used to crunch
every time you changed gears. Crunching gears are caused
by the fact that the gear you want to change into (say, third
gear) is spinning at a different speed than the gear you are
in, so the spinning gears collide and graunch before they
lock together. If it makes it easier for you to visualise, think
of two people trying to move through the same doorway
when the one in front is going much slower than the one
behind – either you speed one up or slow one down,
because if you don’t a confrontation is inevitable.
The purpose of synchromesh is to make the two gears
move at approximately the same speed so that they
merge smoothly like the two halves of a zipper. When
synchromesh is fitted to a manual gearbox (it is on all
modern cars on all gears except reverse) it means that
you can change into any gear except reverse without
getting a crunch. On some cars, like old Toyotas, the
synchromesh mechanism wears out before the rest of
the gearbox, so you get crunches when changing down
from third into second gear. You can continue to use a
crunching gearbox if you master the double-declutch
technique (see separate listing). However, if the car you
a driving crunches even when you put it into first or
reverse from standstill with the engine idling at normal
speed, then the chances are that the problem is not
the gearbox but the clutch and you should have this
checked out. See also clutch. See also double-declutch.
See also gearbox.
sway bar
see anti-sway bar
thread
A spiral ridge that winds around the outside of bolt or
the inside of a nut.
timing
Most car engines work by exploding fuel. The firing has
to take place at the exact right moment if the engine is
to work properly; hence the term timing. As the engine
speeds up, the firing must happen sooner and sooner; this
is called timing advance. See also advance.
timing belt
A belt of synthetic material such as nylon, used to power
the camshafts on many modern engines. See also belt.
See also timing belt tensioner. See also timing chain
tensioner.
timing belt tensioner
A device that keeps a firm and even tension on a timing
belt. The exact amount of tension is usually adjustable by
the mechanic, which is a mixed blessing. Without the right
amount of tension, the belt is likely to slip, often with
disastrous results for the engine, because an unrestrained
or broken timing belt may allow the engine valves to
collide with the pistons. However, many mechanics, who
don’t wish to be blamed later for a slipping timing belt,
tend to heavily overtighten the belt tensioner, causing
the timing belt or its supporting pulleys to break many
thousands of kilometres too soon. See also camshaft. See
also timing belt.
timing chain
A metal chain used to power the camshaft, on many
older (and a few new) engines. A timing belt now does
the same job on many engines, only more quietly. See
also camshaft. See also timing belt. See also timing
chain tensioner.
timing chain tensioner
A device which keeps an even tension on the timing
chain. This is important for efficient operation, because
an untensioned timing chain makes a devil of a racket &
the engine will not work as well, even though the rattly
chain may cause no actual harm to the engine. The rattly
sound that old Morris Minor engines make is largely due
to the fact that they came out of the factory with no timing
chain tensioner at all. See also timing chain.
toe in/toe out
The sideways alignment of the front wheels on a car. If the
front of the wheels stick out at the side, the car has toe-out.
If the wheels point inward at the front, they have toe-in.
You’d probably think that all wheels would be ideally set
straight ahead, but front-wheel drive cars are often set with
a slight toe out, while rear-wheel drive cars are often set
with slight toe-in. See also wheel alignment.
TOHC
Twin overhead camshafts. The same as double overhead
camshafts. See double overhead camshafts.
torque
Torque means twist. The amount of torque that an engine
puts out is used as a measurement of its power.
torque control
A system, usually computer controlled, which limits the
amount of torque going to the powered wheels of a car.
The purpose is to minimise wheel spin. See also limitedslip differential. See also torque. See also wheel spin.
torque converter
A fluid-filled device (actually a type of viscous coupling)
which takes the place of a clutch on cars with automatic
transmissions. See also clutch. See also gearbox. See also
viscous coupling.
torque steer
The tendency for front-wheel drive cars to pull to one side
during heavy acceleration. See also front-wheel drive.
trailing arm suspension
Trailing arm suspension is a type of independent rear
suspension. On a car fitted with trailing arm suspension
the rear wheel assemblies are attached to the rest of the
vehicle by two triangular arms – one on each side. Trailing
arms are attached in front of the rear wheels. These arms
move up and down independently of each other as the
wheels go over bumps, etc. Semi-trailing arms are the same
except that they are mounted at an angle instead of parallel
to the vehicle. Trailing arm suspension has the advantage
that it’s simple and cheap to build. However it has two
disadvantages: one, you tend to get more road noise passed
up into the cabin of the car through the suspension. Two,
to get ideal handling on a car the wheel should always be
at the correct angle in relation to the road, however, as
trailing arm suspension goes up and down the wheels tilt
out of their ideal position, which means that the handling 
All content © The Dog & Lemon Guide 2010. All rights reserved
Dictionary of Car Terms
suffers as a result. See also camber. See also independent
rear suspension See also multi-link suspension. See
also suspension.
transaxle
A combination of gearbox & differential in one unit.
Transaxle setups are common on front-wheel drive cars.
See also differential. See also gearbox. See also frontwheel drive.
transfer case/transfer gearbox
On four-wheel drive vehicles there needs to be a means
of getting power to both ends of the vehicle. The transfer
case takes the power coming out of the main gearbox
and turns it sideways so that it can be passed to the front
wheels. The transfer case is also often used as a means of
selecting very low gears.
transmission
See gearbox.
transverse
See east-west.
traction control
See torque control.
turbocharger
Turbochargers are air pumps that look & work rather like
a hair drier, except that they are powered by the hot gases
passing out through the engine’s exhaust system. These
exhaust gases spin the fan inside the turbocharger & this
spinning fan sucks in air from the outside & forces it
into the engine under pressure, which makes the engine
work more efficiently and therefore put out more power.
When you first press the accelerator with the engine idling,
there’s not much exhaust gas to spin the turbocharger, so
there’s a delay before the exhaust gases build up sufficiently
to make a difference to the way the engine runs. This
delay is called turbo-lag and the symptom of turbo-lag
is a noticeable delay before the engine starts to accelerate
after you press the accelerator. See also intercooler. See
also supercharger.
turbo lag
See turbocharger
understeer
Understeer and oversteer are caused by many different
things, but to put it crudely, understeer is when you
turn the steering wheel and the car doesn’t turn as far as
it should. Oversteer is the opposite – when you turn the
steering wheel, the car moves further than it should. Many
cars with the engine in the back suffer from oversteer
because the weight of the engine tends to push the back
of the car outwards on corners.
U-joint
See universal joint
universal joint
A connection which allows a shaft to spin around while
swivelling in any direction. See also constant velocity
(CV) joint.
valve
A valve is a form of tap, which works on the same principle
as the taps on your kitchen sink - when you operate a valve,
it starts, controls or stops the flow of some substance.
See also engine valve.
variable valve control / variable valve timing
(VVT)
A cylinder head design which enables the amount of
lift of the engine valves (and/or their timing) to alter to
suit the engine speed. See also cylinder head. See also
engine valves.
viscosity
Basically, viscosity is the measure of the thickness of
a liquid. The thicker the liquid, therefore the greater
viscosity. If you want to be absolutely precise, viscosity is
the measure of a liquid’s resistance to flowing. See also
viscous coupling.
viscous coupling
A device that uses the viscosity of a liquid to transmit
power between two shafts (a torque converter on an
automatic transmission is a type of viscous coupling).
Viscous couplings allow a certain amount of slippage at
low speeds, but as one shaft speeds up, the viscosity of
the liquid means that both shafts are soon revolving at a
similar speed. Viscous couplings are used in some limitedslip differentials, as a means of automatically engaging a
four wheel drive system, and also to stabilise the power
going between the front and back wheels of a four wheel
drive, because they can send the most power to the wheels
with the most grip.
viscous drive
See viscous coupling
voltage
See amperes
water pump
Part of the cooling system, a water pump circulates water
from the engine to the radiator and back again after the
water is cooled. Water pumps also pump water up to the
heater. See also radiator. See also thermostat.
wheel alignment
In order to operate correctly, all four wheels on a car must
work together; if one is pointing in the wrong direction,
or is set at the wrong vertical position in relation to the
others, then the car may not handle correctly, and one or
more tyres will probably wear out before its time. Major
components of a wheel alignment are setting the toe-in
& toe out, together with the caster & camber. See also
toe-in/toe out. See also caster. See also camber.
wheelbase
Strictly speaking, wheelbase means the distance between
the front and back wheels, or rather the distance between
the axles that the wheels revolve around. In everyday
language it means the length of the vehicle, that is, a
long-wheelbase vehicle is longer than a short-wheelbase
vehicle.
wheel cylinder
see brake cylinder
wheel spin
If too much power is applied to the wheels which push
or pull a car, the wheels spin rather than stay in firm
contact with the road. This is called wheel spin and is
accompanied by a squealing sound which is similar to the
sound of a car skidding. It is sometimes done for fun, but
is generally avoided because it wears out the tyres, wastes
fuel and in some cases is downright dangerous.
wheelie
Where the powered wheels of a car are made to spin,
generally to show off. See wheel spin.
wishbone
A triangular piece of metal shaped rather like a chicken
wishbone. The long part (called the base) is bolted to the
car’s chassis, the pointed part (called the apex) is bolted
to the hub carrying the road wheel. The Americans call
them an A-frame.
accelerator
a device for increasing speed, esp a pedal for controlling the fuel intake in a motor vehicle; throttle
air bag
a safety device in a car, consisting of a bag that inflates automatically in an accident and prevents the passengers from being thrown forwards
alternator
an electrical machine that generates an alternating current
ammeter
an instrument for measuring an electric current in amperes
anti-roll bar
a crosswise rubber-mounted bar in the suspension of a motor vehicle, which counteracts the movement downward on one side when cornering
axle
a bar or shaft on which a wheel, pair of wheels, or other rotating member revolves
battery
two or more primary cells connected together, usually in series, to provide a source of electric current
bearing
a support, guide, or locating piece for a rotating or reciprocating mechanical part
big end
the larger end of a connecting rod in an internal-combustion engine
bonnet
the hinged metal part of a motor vehicle body that provides access to the engine, or to the luggage space in a rear-engined vehicle
boot
an enclosed compartment of a car for holding luggage, etc, usually at the rear
brake
a device for slowing or stopping a vehicle, wheel, shaft, etc, or for keeping it stationary, esp by means of friction
brake light
a red light attached to the rear of a motor vehicle that lights up when the brakes are applied, serving as a warning to following drivers
brake pad
the flat metal casting, together with the bound friction material, in a disc brake
bucket seat
a seat in a car, aircraft, etc, having curved sides that partially enclose and support the body
bumper
a horizontal metal bar attached to the front or rear end of a car, lorry, etc, to protect against damage from impact
camshaft
a shaft having one or more cams attached to it, esp one used to operate the valves of an internal-combustion engine
carburettor
a device used in petrol engines for atomizing the petrol, controlling its mixture with air, and regulating the intake of the air-petrol mixture into the engine
catalytic converter
a device using three-way catalysts to reduce the obnoxious and poisonous components of the products of combustion (mainly oxides of nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and unburnt hydrocarbons) from the exhausts of motor vehicles
chassis
the steel frame, wheels, engine, and mechanical parts of a motor vehicle, to which the body is attached
childproof lock
choke
a device in the carburettor of a petrol engine that enriches the petrol-air mixture by reducing the air supply
clutch
a device that enables two revolving shafts to be joined or disconnected as required, esp one that transmits the drive from the engine to the gearbox in a vehicle
coil
the transformer in a petrol engine that supplies the high voltage to the sparking plugs
connecting rod
a rod or bar for transmitting motion, esp one that connects a rotating part to a reciprocating part
cowl
the part of a car body that supports the windscreen and the bonnet
crank
a handle incorporating a crank, used to start an engine or motor
crankcase
the metal housing that encloses the crankshaft, connecting rods, etc, in an internal-combustion engine, reciprocating pump, etc
crankshaft
a shaft having one or more cranks, esp the main shaft of an internal-combustion engine to which the connecting rods are attached
cylinder
the chamber in a reciprocating internal-combustion engine, pump, or compressor within which the piston moves
cylinder head
the detachable metal casting that fits onto the top of a cylinder block. In an engine it contains part of the combustion chamber and in an overhead-valve four-stroke engine it houses the valves and their operating mechanisms
dashboard
the instrument panel in a car, boat, or aircraft
demister
a device incorporating a heater and/or blower used in a motor vehicle to free the windscreen of condensation
dipstick
a graduated rod or strip dipped into a container to indicate the fluid level
disc brake
a type of brake in which two calliper-operated pads rub against a flat disc attached to the wheel hub when the brake is applied
distributor
the device in a petrol engine that distributes the high-tension voltage to the sparking plugs in the sequence of the firing order
distributor cap
the cap of an engine's distributor that holds in place the wires from the distributor to the sparking plugs
door
drive shaft
the shaft that transmits power from the gearbox to the differential gear
engine
any machine designed to convert energy, esp heat energy, into mechanical work
exhaust
the parts of an engine through which the exhausted gases or steam pass
fan
any device for creating a current of air by movement of a surface or number of surfaces, esp a rotating device consisting of a number of blades attached to a central hub
fan belt
any belt that drives a fan, esp the belt that drives a cooling fan together with a dynamo or alternator in a car engine
fascia (British)
a less common name for dashboard
fender (US, Canadian)
the part of a car body that surrounds the wheels
fog lamp
a powerful light for use in foggy conditions, usually positioned low down on the front or rear of a road vehicle
fuel gauge
an instrument in a vehicle that indicates how much fuel remains
gasket
a compressible packing piece of paper, rubber, asbestos, etc, sandwiched between the faces or flanges of a joint to provide a seal
gear
a mechanism for transmitting motion by gears, esp for a specific purpose
gearbox
the metal casing within which a train of gears is sealed
gear lever or (U.S. & Canad.) gearshift
the lever used to engage or disengage any of a number of sets of transmission gears to a motor, etc.
glove compartment
a small compartment in a car dashboard for the storage of miscellaneous articles
grille or radiator grille
a grating, often chromium-plated, that admits cooling air to the radiator of a motor vehicle
handbrake
a brake operated by a hand lever
hard top
a vehicle that has a permanent rigid roof
hazard lights
the indicator lights of a motor vehicle when flashing simultaneously to indicate that the vehicle is stationary and temporarily obstructing the traffic
headlight
a powerful light, equipped with a reflector and attached to the front of a motor vehicle, locomotive, etc
headrest
a support for the head, as on a dentist's chair or car seat
hood
the folding roof of a convertible car
horn
a device for producing a warning or signalling noise
hubcap
a metal cap fitting onto the hub of a wheel, esp a stainless steel or chromium-plated one
ignition
the process of igniting the fuel in an internal-combustion engine
indicator
a device for indicating that a motor vehicle is about to turn left or right, esp two pairs of lights that flash when operated or a pair of trafficators
jack
a mechanical or hydraulic device for exerting a large force, esp to raise a heavy weight such as a motor vehicle
little end
the smaller end of a connecting rod in an internal-combustion engine or reciprocating pump
lock
a similar device attached to a machine, vehicle, etc, to prevent use by unauthorized persons
luggage rack
a rack for holding luggage
manifold
a chamber or pipe with a number of inlets or outlets used to collect or distribute a fluid. In an internal-combustion engine the inlet manifoldcarries the vaporized fuel from the carburettor to the inlet ports and the exhaust manifold carries the exhaust gases away
mileometer, milometer, or (U.S. & Canad.) odometer
a device that records the number of miles that a bicycle or motor vehicle has travelled
mud flap
a flap on a car, truck etc, to protect the vehicle from mud and debris
numberplate
a plate mounted on the front and back of a motor vehicle bearing the registration number
oil filter
a filter that removes impurities from engine oil
oil-pressure gauge
oil pump
a pump that sends lubricating oil under pressure to the bearings and other lubricated surfaces of an engine
parcel shelf
a shelf (which is usually removable) inside a car, located behind the back seats, and used to store small items
parking light
pedal
any foot-operated lever or other device, esp one of the two levers that drive the chain wheel of a bicycle, the foot brake, clutch control, or accelerator of a car
petrol cap
a small cover that goes over the hole in a vehicle into which you put petrol
petrol gauge
a gauge that indicates the amount of petrol left in the tank of a vehicle
petrol tank
a tank for holding petrol to supply a vehicle
piston
a disc or cylindrical part that slides to and fro in a hollow cylinder. In an internal-combustion engine it is forced to move by the expanding gases in the cylinder head and is attached by a pivoted connecting rod to a crankshaft or flywheel, thus converting reciprocating motion into rotation
points
the two electrical contacts that make or break the current flow in the distributor of an internal-combustion engine
radiator
the part of an aerial or transmission line that radiates electromagnetic waves
rear light or (U.S. & Canad.) taillight
a red light, usually one of a pair, attached to the rear of a motor vehicle
rear-view mirror
a mirror on a motor vehicle enabling the driver to see traffic coming behind him or her
reversing light
a light on the rear of a motor vehicle to warn others that the vehicle is being reversed
roof
any structure that covers an organ or part
satnav
a system that uses information from satellites to find the best way of getting to a place. It is often found in cars
seat belt or safety belt
a belt or strap worn in a vehicle to restrain forward motion in the event of a collision
shock absorber
any device designed to absorb mechanical shock, esp one fitted to a motor vehicle to damp the recoil of the suspension springs
silencer
any device designed to reduce noise, esp the tubular device containing baffle plates in the exhaust system of a motor vehicle
soft top
a convertible car with a roof made of fabric rather than metal
spare wheel
a wheel with a tyre on it that you keep in your car in case you get a flat tyre and need to replace one of your wheels
speedometer
a device fitted to a vehicle to measure and display the speed of travel
sprocket
a relatively thin wheel having teeth projecting radially from the rim, esp one that drives or is driven by a chain
starter
a device for starting an internal-combustion engine, usually consisting of a powerful electric motor that engages with the flywheel
steering column
(in a motor vehicle) the shaft on which a steering wheel is mounted and by which it is connected with the steering gear
steering wheel
a wheel turned by the driver of a motor vehicle, ship, etc, when he or she wishes to change direction. It is connected to the front wheels, rudder, etc
sump
a receptacle, such as the lower part of the crankcase of an internal-combustion engine, into which liquids, esp lubricants, can drain to form a reservoir
sunroof or sunshine roof
a panel, often translucent, that may be opened in the roof of a car
suspension
a system of springs, shock absorbers, etc, that supports the body of a wheeled or tracked vehicle and insulates it and its occupants from shocks transmitted by the wheels
tailgate
a door at the rear of a hatchback vehicle
tailpipe
a pipe from which the exhaust gases from an internal-combustion engine are discharged, esp the terminal pipe of the exhaust system of a motor vehicle
torsion bar
a metal bar acting as a torsional spring, esp as used in the suspensions of some motor vehicles
towbar
(in cars) a method of preventing wheels from spinning when traction is applied by limiting the amount of power supplied to the wheel
traction control
a method of preventing car wheels from spinning when traction is applied by limiting the amount of power supplied to the wheel
transmission
a system of shafts, gears, torque converters, etc, that transmits power, esp the arrangement of such parts that transmits the power of the engine to the driving wheels of a motor vehicle
trim
the upholstery and decorative facings, as on the door panels, of a car's interior
tyre
a rubber ring placed over the rim of a wheel of a road vehicle to provide traction and reduce road shocks, esp a hollow inflated ring (pneumatic tyre) consisting of a reinforced outer casing enclosing an inner tube
universal joint
a form of coupling between two rotating shafts allowing freedom of angular movement in all directions
wheel
a solid disc, or a circular rim joined to a hub by radial or tangential spokes, that is mounted on a shaft about which it can turn, as in vehicles and machines
wheel brace
a tool used to loosen or tighten the nuts holding a vehicle's wheel in place
wheel nut
a nut which attaches the wheel of a vehicle to its hub
wheel trim
metallic decorative trim over or around the wheels of a motor vehicle
windscreen
the sheet of flat or curved glass that forms a window of a motor vehicle, esp the front window
windscreen wiper
an electrically operated blade with a rubber edge that wipes a windscreen clear of rain, snow, etc
wing
the part of a car body that surrounds the wheels
wing mirror
a mirror on the wing of a car
wing nut
a threaded nut tightened by hand by means of two flat lugs or wings projecting from the central body
Engine power or horsepower is the maximum power that an engine can put out. It can be expressed in kilowatts or horsepower. The power output depends on the size and design of the engine, but also on the speed at which it is running and the load or torque. Maximum power is achieved at relatively high speeds and at high load.

Measurement	American unit	Metric unit	Affects	General preference	Notes
0 to 100 km/h (0 to 60 mph)	seconds	seconds	acceleration	lower is better	
0 to 100 to 0 mph	seconds	seconds	acceleration & braking	lower is better	formerly common in British publications
Braking distance	feet	meters	safety	shorter is better	
Brake specific fuel consumption	lb/(hp·h)	g/(kW·h)	economics, range	lower is better	
Drag coefficient	(ratio)	(ratio)	economics, top speed, range	lower is better	
Frontal cross-section area	sq ft	m2	economics, top speed, range, cargo capacity	lower is better	if area is too small, vehicle becomes difficult to use
Fuel economy	mpg	l/100 km and km/L	economics, range	greater is better (mpg and km/L), lower is better (L/100 km)	must be specified on new vehicles for sale in the US & UK
Maximum g-force(s)	g or ft/s2	g or m/s2	acceleration	higher is usually better	measures cornering, braking or forward acceleration
Ground pressure	psi	pascals (sometimes bar)	traction	lower is better in soft ground, reduces bogging; higher with loose surface	has greater impact on off-road vehicles
Lift to drag ratio	-	-	economics, range	higher is better for aircraft	improved by narrow, long wings
Torque	lbf·ft or lb·ft	N·m	acceleration	higher is better	Refers to the overall maximum torque an engine can produce, or the maximum torque an engine can produce at a given RPM. 300 lbf·ft would be like applying 300 pounds of force to the end of 1 foot long wrench, or twisting a 2-inch diameter shaft with 3600 pounds of force!
Power	hp	kW	acceleration	higher is better	Refers to maximum power (high torque and speed). The rate at which torque is applied. Also the rate at which work is done. Power = Torque × RPM / 5252. Automobile manufacturers publish power measured at the crankshaft (bhp or brake horsepower). However, it is the power a car can produce at the wheels (wheel horsepower or whp) that matters when it comes to acceleration performance. Wheel horsepower equals brake horsepower minus drivetrain losses, which can be anywhere from about 10% to 25%[1].
Power-to-weight ratio	hp/lb	W/kg	acceleration	higher is better	
Second moment	psi (lb·sq ft)	kg·m2	handling	lower permits quicker turn-in for cars, higher is more stable in straight line.	The moment of inertia about a vertical axis of a vehicle
Propulsive efficiency	%	%	economics, range	higher is better	For rockets and aircraft, percent of the energy contained in a vehicle's propellant converted into useful energy
Rate of climb	feet/min	meters/min	combat effectiveness, economics	higher is better	Applies to fighter aircraft who need to intercept or evade other fighters. In civilian aircraft this denotes how quickly they can reach optimal cruising altitude.
Roll center	inches	mm	handling	Too many variables to state a general preference.	
Rolling friction	-	-	economics	lower is better	improved by narrow, high pressure tires
Shift time	mSec	ms	acceleration	lower is better	for vehicles equipped with automatic transmissions
Specific fuel consumption (thrust)	lb/(lbf·h)	kg/(kgf·h) or g/(kN·s)	economics, range	lower is better (for any given speed)	in airbreathing jet engines it is improved by using more inert air for propulsion (i.e. lower exhaust velocity), in rockets, higher exhaust velocity
Specific fuel consumption (shaft engine)	lb/(hp·h)	kg/(kW·h)	economics, range	lower is better	for shaft engines less fuel use for a given output power means higher efficiency
specific impulse	seconds	seconds or kN·s/kg	economics, delta-v/range	higher is typically better	in airbreathing jet engines it is improved by using more inert air for propulsion (i.e. lower exhaust velocity), in rockets, higher exhaust velocity
Top speed	mph	km/h	Maximum rate of straight line travel	higher is better	Electronically limited in some cars for safety (mostly due to concerns of tire failure at high speed)
Turning radius	feet	meters	handling	lower is better	
Weight	lb	kg	acceleration, braking distance, traction, fuel consumption, tyre wear	lower is better for vehicle performance and taxation; larger is usually better for vehicles carrying loads	
Weight distribution	%	%	handling, acceleration, traction	close to 50:50 (%Front:%Rear) is commonly considered better	
Gross axle weight rating	lb/axle	kg/axle	durability, economics	larger is better for vehicles carrying loads	Ultimately limited by the hardness of the road surface and legal limits intended to limit damage to it
descr
Maker name slug
Model name slug
In Km
""
In ccm
In kW
Year of the last emission control
Automatic or Manual
"gasoline, diesel, cng, lpg, electric"
Date scraped
"Date last seen online, at most 60 days after date_created"
Price converted to EUR
" : when this ad was first crawled, all field-values are taken from this date"
 : name of the car
 : private or dealer
 : the price on the ad to sell the car
 : at which year the car was first registered
 : power of the car in PS
 : how many kilometers the car has driven
 : at which month the car was first registered
 : if the car has a damage which is not repaired yet
 : the date for which the ad at ebay was created
 : number of pictures in the ad (unfortunately this field contains everywhere a 0 and is thus useless (bug in crawler!) )
 : when the crawler saw this ad last online
Link to listing
Craigslist region in which this listing was posted
Price of vehicle
Year of vehicle
Manufacturer of vehicle
Make of vehicle
Condition of vehicle
Number of cylinders of vehicle
Fuel taken by vehicle
Miles vehicle has been driven
Title status of vehicle (e.g. clean - this vehicle has all legal documents. missing - these documents are missing)
Transmission of vehicle
Vehicle Identification Number
Drive of vehicle
Size of vehicle
Vehicle type
Color of vehicle
Link to image of vehicle
Latitude of vehicle (not precise but very close)
Longitude of vehicle (not precise but very close)
Federal Information Processing Standards code
County of listing
2 letter state code
State name
Historical average temperature for location in October/November
The brand and model of the car
The location in which the car is being sold or is available for purchase
The year or edition of the model
The total kilometres driven in the car by the previous owner(s) in KM.
"The type of fuel used by the car. (Petrol, Diesel, Electric, CNG, LPG)"
The type of transmission used by the car. (Automatic / Manual)
The standard mileage offered by the car company in kmpl or km/kg
The displacement volume of the engine in CC.
The maximum power of the engine in bhp.
The number of seats in the car.
The price of a new car of the same model.
: The cost of the car
 : The country in which the car is up for sale
 : An ordinal metric for understanding the reliability of the car
: The fuel efficiency of the car
A categorical variable defining the category to which the car belongs.
: The weight of the car
 : Represents the engine displacement of the car
": Horsepower of the car, a unit that measures it's power"




